WHO recommendations on antenatal care 
for a positive pregnancy experience
WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience.
 I.World Health Organization.
 ISBN 978 92 4 154991 2
 Subject headings are available from WHO institutional repository
 © World Health Organization 2016
 All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization are available on the WHO website  
(http://www.who.int) or can be purchased from WHO Press, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia,  
1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791 3264; fax: +41 22 791 4857; email: bookorders@who.int). 
Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications – whether for sale or for  
non-commercial distribution – should be addressed to WHO Press through the WHO website  
(http://www.who.int/about/licensing/copyright_form).
 The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of 
any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country, 
territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted and 
dashed lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement.
 The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed 
or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not 
mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital 
letters.
 All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained 
in this publication. However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either 
expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no 
event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use. 
Design and layout by Green Ink (www.greenink.co.uk) 
Printed in Luxembourg
Contents
 Acknowledgements 
Acronyms and abbreviations 
Executive summary 
1. Introduction 
2. Methods 
3. Evidence and recommendations 
A. Nutritional interventions 
B. Maternal and fetal assessment 
C. Preventive measures 
D. Interventions for common physiological symptoms 
E. Health systems interventions to improve the utilization and quality of ANC 
4.  Implementation of the ANC guideline and recommendations: introducing the  
2016 WHO ANC model 
5. Research implications 
6. Dissemination, applicability and updating of the guideline and recommendations 
References  
Annex 1:  External experts and WHO staff involved in the preparation of this guideline 
Annex 2:  Other WHO guidelines with recommendations relevant to routine ANC 
Annex 3:  Summary of declarations of interest from the Guideline Development Group  
(GDG) members and how they were managed 
Annex 4:  Implementation considerations for ANC guideline recommendations 
Web annexes: WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience*
 Web annex 1:  Priority questions and outcomes for the antenatal care (ANC) interventions  
identified for this guideline
 Web annex 2:  Changes from the approved scope of this guideline
 Web annex 3:  Guideline Development Group (GDG) judgements related to the recommendations
 Web supplement: WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience:  
evidence base*
 The standardized criteria used in grading the evidence and the GRADE tables have been published in this 
separate Web supplement. These evidence tables are referred to within this document by number, prefixed with 
"EB" (for evidence base), for ease of reference.
 v
 vii
 ix
 1
 4
 13
 14
 40
 63
 74
 85
 105
 118
 120
 123
 137
 141
 143
 145
 * available at: www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/maternal_perinatal_health/anc-positive-pregnancy-experience/en/
« To achieve the Every Woman Every Child 
vision and the Global Strategy for Women's, 
Children's and Adolescents' Health, we need 
innovative, evidence-based approaches to 
antenatal care. I welcome these guidelines, 
which aim to put women at the centre of care, 
enhancing their experience of pregnancy and 
ensuring that babies have the best possible 
start in life. »
 Ban Ki-moon, United Nations Secretary-General
Acknowledgements
 The Departments of Reproductive Health and Research (RHR), Nutrition for Health and Development (NHD), 
and Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health (MCA) of the World Health Organization (WHO) 
gratefully acknowledge the contributions that many individuals and organizations have made to the development 
of this guideline.
 A. Metin Gülmezoglu, Matthews Mathai, Olufemi Oladapo, Juan Pablo Peña-Rosas and Özge Tunçalp were the 
members of the WHO Steering Group that managed the guideline development process. The members of the 
Guideline Development Group (GDG) included Mohammed Ariful Aram, Françoise Cluzeau, Luz Maria De-Regil, 
Aft Ghérissi, Gill Gyte, Rintaro Mori, James Neilson, Lynnette Neufeld, Lisa Noguchi, Nafissa Osman, Erika Ota, 
Tomas Pantoja, Bob Pattinson, Kathleen Rasmussen, Niveen Abu Rmeileh, Harshpal Singh Sachdev, Rusidah 
Selamat, Charlotte Warren and Charles Wisonge. James Neilson served as chair of the GDG.
 We would also like to thank the following WHO regional advisors for their contributions: Karima Gholbzouri, 
Gunta Lazdane, Bremen de Mucio, Mari Nagai, Leopold Ouedraogo, Neena Raina and Susan Serruya. We 
would also like to thank the following individuals for their contributions to the guideline process, including the 
scoping: Manzi Anatole, Rifat Atun, Himanshu Bhushan, Jacquelyn Caglia, Chompilas Chongsomchai, Morseda 
Chowdhury, Mengistu Hailemariam, Stephen Hodgins, Annie Kearns, Ana Langer, Pisake Lumbiganon, Taiwo 
Oyelade, Jeffrey Smith, Petra ten Hoope-Bender, James Tielsch and Rownak Khan.
 Special thanks to the authors of the Cochrane systematic reviews used in this guideline for their assistance and 
collaboration in preparing or updating them. Sonja Henderson, Frances Kellie and Nancy Medley coordinated 
the updating of the relevant Cochrane systematic reviews. Soo Downe and Kenny Finlayson performed the 
scoping and qualitative reviews on the views of women and providers with regard to antenatal care (ANC). For 
the evidence on interventions, Edguardo Abalos, Monica Chamillard and Virginia Dias reviewed and graded the 
scientific evidence. For the evidence on test accuracy, Khalid Khan and Ewelina Rogozinska reviewed and graded 
the scientific evidence. Theresa Lawrie reviewed the evidence grading, and drafted the evidence summaries. 
Simon Lewin and Claire Glenton contributed to the preparation of the evidence summaries on ANC delivery 
options and provided technical support on the DECIDE framework (Developing & Evaluating Communication 
strategies to support Informed Decisions & Practice based on Evidence). Emma Allanson coordinated the 
population of the DECIDE frameworks. Jenny Moberg reviewed and summarized the indirect evidence on ANC 
delivery. Ipek Gurol-Urganci, Charles O’Donovan and Inger Scheel reviewed data on the implementation of 
focused ANC (FANC) from country case studies to support the guideline recommendations. The members of the 
WHO Steering Group and Theresa Lawrie drafted the final guideline document.
 We thank the observers who represented various organizations during the guideline development process, 
including: France Donnay of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation; Rita Borg-Xuereb of the International 
Confederation of Midwives (ICM); Diogo Ayres-de-Campos and CN Purandare of the International Federation of 
Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO); Luc de Bernis of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA); and Roland 
Kupka of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF); and Deborah Armbruster and Karen Fogg of the United 
States Agency for International Development (USAID).
 We appreciate the feedback provided by a large number of international stakeholders during the scoping 
exercise that took place as part of the guideline development process. We also would like to thank the following 
individuals who contributed to this process and reviewed the guideline document: Andrea Bosman, Maurice 
Bucagu, Jahnavi Daru, Claudia Garcia-Moreno, Haileyesus Getahun, Rodolfo Gomez, Tracey Goodman, Tamar 
Kabakian, Avinash Kanchar, Philipp Lambach, Sarah de Masi, Frances McConville, Antonio Montresor, Justin 
Ortiz, Anayda Portela, Jeremy Pratt, Lisa Rogers, Nathalie Roos, Silvia Schwarte, Maria Pura Solon, João Paulo 
Souza, Petr Velebil, Teodora Wi, Ahmadu Yakubu, Yacouba Yaro and Gerardo Zamora.
 v
 Acknowledgements
Funding was provided for this guideline by USAID and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, supplemented by the 
UNDP/UNFPA/UNICEF/WHO/World Bank Special Programme of Research, Development and Research Training 
in Human Reproduction (HRP) core budget. The views of the funding bodies have not influenced the content of 
this guideline.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 vi
Acronyms and abbreviations
 ANC  
ASB  
BMI  
CERQual 
CI  
CTG  
DECIDE  
DOI  
EB  
EGWG  
ERG  
FANC  
FIGO  
GBS  
GDG  
GRADE  
GRC  
GREAT  
Hb  
HIC  
HIV  
HRP  
ICM  
IPTp  
IPTp-SP  
IQR  
IUGR  
IVR  
LMIC  
MCA  
MD  
MLCC  
MMN  
MUAC  
NHD  
NRS  
antenatal care
 asymptomatic bacteriuria
 body mass index
 Confidence in the Evidence from Reviews of Qualitative Research
 confidence interval
 cardiotocography
 Developing and Evaluating Communication strategies to support Informed Decisions  
and Practice based on Evidence
 declaration of interest
 evidence base
 excessive gestational weight gain
 External Review Group
 focused antenatal care
 International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
 group B streptococcus
 Guideline Development Group
 Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation
 Guidelines Review Committee
 Guideline-driven, Research priorities, Evidence synthesis, Application of evidence,  
and Transfer of knowledge
 haemoglobin
 high-income country
 human immunodeficiency virus
 UNDP/UNFPA/UNICEF/WHO/World Bank Special Programme of Research, Development  
and Research Training in Human Reproduction
 International Confederation of Midwives
 intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy
 intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine
 interquartile range
 intrauterine growth restriction
 Initiative for Vaccine Research
 low- and middle-income country
 Department of Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health (at WHO)
 mean difference
 midwife-led continuity of care
 multiple micronutrient
 mid-upper arm circumference
 Department of Nutrition for Health and Development (at WHO)
 non-randomized study
 vii
 Acronyms and abbreviations
OR  
odds ratio
 PAHO  
PCG  
PICO  
PLA  
PMNCH  
PMR  
PrEP  
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 viii
 PROM  
PWG  
RCT  
Rh  
RHR  
RR  
RUTI  
SFH  
SGA  
SP   
TB  
TBA  
Tdap 
TDF  
TT  
TT-CV  
TWG  
UN  
UNDP  
UNFPA  
UNICEF  
UNIMMAP 
US$  
USAID  
UTI  
WHO  
Pan American Health Organization (WHO Regional Office for the Americas)
 Pregnancy and Childbirth Group (Cochrane Collaboration)
 population (P), intervention (I), comparator (C), outcome (O)
 participatory learning and action
 The Partnership for Maternal, Newborn & Child Health
 perinatal mortality rate
 pre-exposure prophylaxis
 prelabour rupture of membranes
 participatory women’s group
 randomized controlled trial
 rhesus
 Department of Reproductive Health and Research (at WHO)
 relative risk
 recurrent urinary tract infections
 symphysis-fundal height
 small for gestational age
 sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine
 tuberculosis
 traditional birth attendant
 tetanus/diphtheria/acellular pertussis 
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate
 tetanus toxoid
 tetanus toxoid-containing vaccine 
Technical Working Group
 United Nations
 United Nations Development Programme
 United Nations Population Fund
 United Nations Children’s Fund
 United Nations international multiple micronutrient preparation
 United States (US) dollar
 United States Agency for International Development
 urinary tract infection
 World Health Organization
Executive summary
 Introduction
 In 2016, at the start of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) era, pregnancy-related preventable morbidity 
and mortality remains unacceptably high. While substantial progress has been made, countries need to 
consolidate and increase these advances, and to expand their agendas to go beyond survival, with a view to 
maximizing the health and potential of their populations.
 The World Health Organization (WHO) envisions a world where every pregnant woman and newborn receives 
quality care throughout the pregnancy, childbirth and the postnatal period. Within the continuum of reproductive 
health care, antenatal care (ANC) provides a platform for important health-care functions, including health 
promotion, screening and diagnosis, and disease prevention. It has been established that by implementing timely 
and appropriate evidence-based practices, ANC can save lives. Crucially, ANC also provides the opportunity to 
communicate with and support women, families and communities at a critical time in the course of a woman’s 
life. The process of developing these recommendations on ANC has highlighted the importance of providing 
effective communication about physiological, biomedical, behavioural and sociocultural issues, and effective 
support, including social, cultural, emotional and psychological support, to pregnant women in a respectful way. 
These communication and support functions of ANC are key, not only to saving lives, but to improving lives, 
health-care utilization and quality of care. Women’s positive experiences during ANC and childbirth can create 
the foundations for healthy motherhood.
 This is a comprehensive WHO guideline on routine ANC for pregnant women and adolescent girls. The aim is 
for these recommendations to complement existing WHO guidelines on the management of specific pregnancy
related complications. The guidance is intended to reflect and respond to the complex nature of the issues 
surrounding the practice and delivery of ANC, and to prioritize person-centred health and well-being – not only 
the prevention of death and morbidity – in accordance with a human rights-based approach. 
The scope of this guideline was informed by a systematic review of women’s views, which shows that women 
want a positive pregnancy experience from ANC. A positive pregnancy experience is defined as maintaining 
physical and sociocultural normality, maintaining a healthy pregnancy for mother and baby (including preventing 
or treating risks, illness and death), having an effective transition to positive labour and birth, and achieving 
positive motherhood (including maternal self-esteem, competence and autonomy).
 Recognizing that a woman’s experience of care is key to transforming ANC and creating thriving families and 
communities, this guideline addresses the following questions:
 n
 n What are the evidence-based practices during ANC that improve outcomes and lead to a positive pregnancy 
experience?
 n
 n How should these practices be delivered? 
Guideline development methods
 These ANC recommendations are intended to inform the development of relevant health-care policies and 
clinical protocols. The guideline was developed using standard operating procedures in accordance with the 
process described in the WHO handbook for guideline development. Briefly, these procedures include:  
(i) identification of priority questions and outcomes; (ii) evidence retrieval and synthesis; (iii) assessment of 
the evidence; (iv) formulation of the recommendations; and (v) planning for implementation, dissemination, 
impact evaluation and updating of the guideline. The quality of the scientific evidence underpinning the 
recommendations was graded using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and 
ix
 Executive summary
Evaluation (GRADE) and Confidence in the Evidence from Reviews of Qualitative research (GRADE-CERQual) 
approaches, for quantitative and qualitative evidence, respectively. Up-to-date systematic reviews were used 
to prepare evidence profiles for priority questions. The DECIDE (Developing and Evaluating Communication 
Strategies to support Informed Decisions and Practice based on Evidence) framework, an evidence-to-decision 
tool that includes intervention effects, values, resources, equity, acceptability and feasibility criteria, was used 
to guide the formulation and approval of recommendations by the Guideline Development Group (GDG) – an 
international group of experts assembled for the purpose of developing this guideline – at three Technical 
Consultations between October 2015 and March 2016.
 Recommendations
 The WHO Technical Consultations led to the development of 39 recommendations related to five types 
of interventions: A. Nutritional interventions, B. Maternal and fetal assessment, C. Preventive measures, 
D. Interventions for common physiological symptoms, and E. Health system interventions to improve utilization 
and quality of ANC. Interventions were either recommended, not recommended, or recommended under certain 
conditions based on the GDG’s judgements according to the DECIDE criteria, which informed both the direction 
and context, if any, of the recommendation. To ensure that each recommendation is correctly understood 
and applied in practice, the context of all context-specific recommendations is clearly stated within each 
recommendation, and the contributing experts provided additional remarks where needed. Users of the guideline 
should refer to these remarks, which are presented along with the evidence summaries within the guideline. In 
addition, ANC-relevant recommendations from current guidance produced by other WHO departments were 
systematically identified and 10 such recommendations were consolidated into this guideline for the purpose of 
providing a comprehensive document for end-users. All 49 recommendations on ANC for a positive pregnancy 
experience are summarized in Table 1. 
In accordance with WHO guideline development standards, these recommendations will be reviewed and 
updated following the identification of new evidence, with major reviews and updates at least every five years. 
WHO welcomes suggestions regarding additional questions for inclusion in future updates of the guideline.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 x
 At the Technical Consultations, the implementation considerations of individual recommendations and of the 
guideline as a whole were discussed. The GDG, emphasizing the evidence indicating increased fetal deaths and 
lesser satisfaction of women with the four-visit model (also known as focused or basic ANC), decided to increase 
the recommended number of contacts between the mother and the health-care providers at time points that may 
facilitate assessment of well-being and provision of interventions to improve outcomes if problems are identified 
(see Recommendation E.7 in Table 1). The recommendations in this guideline should be implemented alongside 
other quality-improvement activities. Derivative products of this guideline will include a practical implementation 
manual for health-care practitioners, which will incorporate ANC recommendations and established good 
clinical practices. Table 1 summarizes the list of all interventions evaluated by the GDG and therefore includes 
interventions that are recommended, only recommended under certain conditions (including research), and 
interventions that are not recommended.
xi Executive summary
 Table 1: Summary list of WHO recommendations on antenatal care (ANC) for a positive pregnancy 
experience
 These recommendations apply to pregnant women and adolescent girls within the context of routine ANC
 A. Nutritional interventions
 Recommendation Type of 
recommendation 
Dietary 
interventions
 A.1.1: Counselling about healthy eating and keeping physically active 
during pregnancy is recommended for pregnant women to stay healthy 
and to prevent excessive weight gain during pregnancy.a
 Recommended
 A.1.2: In undernourished populations, nutrition education on increasing 
daily energy and protein intake is recommended for pregnant women to 
reduce the risk of low-birth-weight neonates.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 A.1.3: In undernourished populations, balanced energy and protein 
dietary supplementation is recommended for pregnant women to reduce 
the risk of stillbirths and small-for-gestational-age neonates.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 A.1.4: In undernourished populations, high-protein supplementation 
is not recommended for pregnant women to improve maternal and 
perinatal outcomes.
 Not recommended
 Iron and folic acid 
supplements
 A.2.1: Daily oral iron and folic acid supplementation with 30 mg to 60 mg 
of elemental ironb and 400   g (0.4 mg) of folic acidc is recommended 
for pregnant women to prevent maternal anaemia, puerperal sepsis, low 
birth weight, and preterm birth.d
 Recommended
 A.2.2: Intermittent oral iron and folic acid supplementation with 120 
mg of elemental irone and 2800   g (2.8 mg) of folic acid once weekly is 
recommended for pregnant women to improve maternal and neonatal 
outcomes if daily iron is not acceptable due to side-effects, and in 
populations with an anaemia prevalence among pregnant women of less 
than 20%.f 
Context-specific 
recommendation
 Calcium 
supplements
 A.3: In populations with low dietary calcium intake, daily calcium 
supplementation (1.5–2.0 g oral elemental calcium) is recommended for 
pregnant women to reduce the risk of pre-eclampsia.g
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 Vitamin A 
supplements
 A.4: Vitamin A supplementation is only recommended for pregnant 
women in areas where vitamin A deficiency is a severe public health 
problem,h to prevent night blindness.i
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 a. A healthy diet contains adequate energy, protein, vitamins and minerals, obtained through the consumption of a variety of foods, 
including green and orange vegetables, meat, fish, beans, nuts, whole grains and fruit.
 b. The equivalent of 60 mg of elemental iron is 300 mg of ferrous sulfate hepahydrate, 180 mg of ferrous fumarate or 500 mg of ferrous 
gluconate.
 c. Folic acid should be commenced as early as possible (ideally before conception) to prevent neural tube defects.
 d. This recommendation supersedes the previous recommendation found in the WHO publication Guideline: daily iron and folic acid 
supplementation in pregnant women (2012).
 e. The equivalent of 120 mg of elemental iron equals 600 mg of ferrous sulfate heptahydrate, 360 mg of ferrous fumarate or 1000 mg of 
ferrous gluconate.
 f. This recommendation supersedes the previous recommendation in the WHO publication Guideline: intermittent iron and folic acid 
supplementation in non-anaemic pregnant women (2012).
 g. This recommendation is consistent with the WHO recommendations for prevention and treatment of pre-eclampsia and eclampsia (2011) and 
supersedes the previous recommendation found in the WHO publication Guideline: calcium supplementation in pregnant women (2013).
 h. Vitamin A deficiency is a severe public health problem if > 5% of women in a population have a history of night blindness in their most 
recent pregnancy in the previous 3–5 years that ended in a live birth, or if > 20% of pregnant women have a serum retinol level  
< 0.70   mol/L. Determination of vitamin A deficiency as a public health problem involves estimating the prevalence of deficiency in a 
population by using specific biochemical and clinical indicators of vitamin A status.
 i. This recommendation supersedes the previous recommendation found in the WHO publication Guideline: vitamin A supplementation in 
pregnant women (2011).
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 xii
 Zinc supplements A.5: Zinc supplementation for pregnant women is only recommended in 
the context of rigorous research.
 Context-specific 
recommendation 
(research)
 Multiple 
micronutrient 
supplements
 A.6: Multiple micronutrient supplementation is not recommended for 
pregnant women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes.
 Not recommended
 Vitamin B6 
(pyridoxine) 
supplements
 A.7: Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) supplementation is not recommended for 
pregnant women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes.
 Not recommended
 Vitamin E and C 
supplements
 A.8: Vitamin E and C supplementation is not recommended for pregnant 
women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes.
 Not recommended
 Vitamin D 
supplements
 A.9: Vitamin D supplementation is not recommended for pregnant 
women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes.j
 Not recommended
 Restricting caffeine 
intake
 A.10: For pregnant women with high daily caffeine intake (more than 
300 mg per day),k lowering daily caffeine intake during pregnancy is 
recommended to reduce the risk of pregnancy loss and low-birth-weight 
neonates. 
Context-specific 
recommendation
 B. Maternal and fetal assessment l
 Recommendation Type of 
recommendation
 B.1: Maternal assessment
 Anaemia B.1.1: Full blood count testing is the recommended method for diagnosing 
anaemia in pregnancy. In settings where full blood count testing is not 
available, on-site haemoglobin testing with a haemoglobinometer is 
recommended over the use of the haemoglobin colour scale as the 
method for diagnosing anaemia in pregnancy.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 Asymptomatic 
bacteriuria (ASB)
 B.1.2: Midstream urine culture is the recommended method for 
diagnosing asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB) in pregnancy. In settings 
where urine culture is not available, on-site midstream urine Gram
staining is recommended over the use of dipstick tests as the method for 
diagnosing ASB in pregnancy.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 Intimate partner 
violence (IPV)
 B.1.3: Clinical enquiry about the possibility of intimate partner violence 
(IPV) should be strongly considered at antenatal care visits when 
assessing conditions that may be caused or complicated by IPV in order 
to improve clinical diagnosis and subsequent care, where there is the 
capacity to provide a supportive response (including referral where 
appropriate) and where the WHO minimum requirements are met.m n
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 j. This recommendation supersedes the previous recommendation found in the WHO publication Guideline: vitamin D supplementation in 
pregnant women (2012).
 k. This includes any product, beverage or food containing caffeine (i.e. brewed coffee, tea, cola-type soft drinks, caffeinated energy drinks, 
chocolate, caffeine tablets).
 l. Evidence on essential ANC activities, such as measuring maternal blood pressure, proteinuria and weight, and checking for fetal heart 
sounds, was not assessed by the GDG as these activities are considered to be part of good clinical practice.
 m. Minimum requirements are: a protocol/standard operating procedure; training on how to ask about IPV, and on how to provide the 
minimum response or beyond; private setting; confidentiality ensured; system for referral in place; and time to allow for appropriate 
disclosure.
 n. This recommendation is consistent with Responding to intimate partner violence and sexual violence against women: WHO clinical and policy 
guidelines (2013).
xiii Executive summary
 Recommendations integrated from other WHO guidelines that are relevant to ANC maternal assessment
 Gestational 
diabetes mellitus 
(GDM)
 B.1.4: Hyperglycaemia first detected at any time during pregnancy 
should be classified as either gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) or 
diabetes mellitus in pregnancy, according to WHO criteria.o
 Recommended
 Tobacco use B.1.5: Health-care providers should ask all pregnant women about their 
tobacco use (past and present) and exposure to second-hand smoke as 
early as possible in the pregnancy and at every antenatal care visit.p
 Recommended
 Substance use B.1.6: Health-care providers should ask all pregnant women about their 
use of alcohol and other substances (past and present) as early as 
possible in the pregnancy and at every antenatal care visit.q
 Recommended
 Human immuno
deficiency virus 
(HIV) and syphilis
 B.1.7: In high-prevalence settings,r provider-initiated testing and 
counselling (PITC) for HIV should be considered a routine component 
of the package of care for pregnant women in all antenatal care settings. 
In low-prevalence settings, PITC can be considered for pregnant women 
in antenatal care settings as a key component of the effort to eliminate 
mother-to-child transmission of HIV, and to integrate HIV testing 
with syphilis, viral or other key tests, as relevant to the setting, and to 
strengthen the underlying maternal and child health systems.s
 Recommended
 Tuberculosis (TB) B.1.8: In settings where the tuberculosis (TB) prevalence in the general 
population is 100/100 000 population or higher, systematic screening 
for active TB should be considered for pregnant women as part of 
antenatal care.t
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 B.2: Fetal assessment
 Daily fetal 
movement 
counting
 B.2.1: Daily fetal movement counting, such as with “count-to-ten” kick 
charts, is only recommended in the context of rigorous research.
 Context-specific 
recommendation 
(research)
 Symphysis-fundal 
height (SFH) 
measurement
 B.2.2: Replacing abdominal palpation with symphysis-fundal height 
(SFH) measurement for the assessment of fetal growth is not 
recommended to improve perinatal outcomes. A change from what 
is usually practiced (abdominal palpation or SFH measurement) in a 
particular setting is not recommended.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 Antenatal cardio
tocography
 B.2.3: Routine antenatal cardiotocographyu is not recommended for 
pregnant women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes.
 Not recommended
 o. This is not a recommendation on routine screening for hyperglycaemia in pregnancy. It has been adapted and integrated from the WHO 
publication Diagnostic criteria and classification of hyperglycaemia first detected in pregnancy (2013), which states that GDM should be 
diagnosed at any time in pregnancy if one or more of the following criteria are met:  
•  fasting plasma glucose 5.1–6.9 mmol/L (92–125 mg/dL) 
•  1-hour plasma glucose > 10.0 mmol/L (180 mg/dL) following a 75 g oral glucose load 
•  2-hour plasma glucose 8.5–11.0 mmol/L (153–199 mg/dL) following a 75 g oral glucose load.  
Diabetes mellitus in pregnancy should be diagnosed if one or more of the following criteria are met:  
•  fasting plasma glucose > 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL) 
•  2-hour plasma glucose > 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) following a 75 g oral glucose load  
•  random plasma glucose > 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) in the presence of diabetes symptoms.
 p. Integrated from WHO recommendations for the prevention and management of tobacco use and second-hand smoke exposure in pregnancy 
(2013).
 q. Integrated from the WHO publication Guidelines for the identification and management of substance use and substance use disorders in 
pregnancy (2014).
 r. High-prevalence settings are defined in the 2015 WHO publication Consolidated guidelines on HIV testing services as settings with greater 
than 5% HIV prevalence in the population being tested. Low-prevalence settings are those with less than 5% HIV prevalence in the 
population being tested. In settings with a generalized or concentrated HIV epidemic, retesting of HIV-negative women should be 
performed in the third trimester because of the high risk of acquiring HIV infection during pregnancy; please refer to Recommendation 
B.1.7 for details.
 s. Adapted and integrated from the WHO publication Consolidated guidelines on HIV testing services (2015).
 t. Adapted and integrated from the WHO publication Systematic screening for active tuberculosis: principles and recommendations (2013).
 u. Cardiotocography is a continuous recording of the fetal heart rate and uterine contractions obtained via an ultrasound transducer placed 
on the mother’s abdomen.
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 xiv
 Ultrasound scan B.2.4: One ultrasound scan before 24 weeks of gestation (early 
ultrasound) is recommended for pregnant women to estimate 
gestational age, improve detection of fetal anomalies and multiple 
pregnancies, reduce induction of labour for post-term pregnancy, and 
improve a woman’s pregnancy experience. 
Recommended
 Doppler ultrasound 
of fetal blood 
vessels
 B.2.5: Routine Doppler ultrasound examination is not recommended for 
pregnant women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes.v 
Not recommended
 C. Preventive measures
 Recommendation Type of 
recommendation
 Antibiotics for 
asymptomatic 
bacteriuria (ASB)
 C.1: A seven-day antibiotic regimen is recommended for all pregnant 
women with asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB) to prevent persistent 
bacteriuria, preterm birth and low birth weight.
 Recommended
 Antibiotic 
prophylaxis to 
prevent recurrent 
urinary tract 
infections
 C.2: Antibiotic prophylaxis is only recommended to prevent recurrent 
urinary tract infections in pregnant women in the context of rigorous 
research.
 Context-specific 
recommendation 
(research)
 Antenatal anti-D 
immunoglobulin 
administration
 C.3: Antenatal prophylaxis with anti-D immunoglobulin in non-sensitized 
Rh-negative pregnant women at 28 and 34 weeks of gestation to prevent 
RhD alloimmunization is only recommended in the context of rigorous 
research.
 Context-specific 
recommendation 
(research)
 Preventive 
anthelminthic 
treatment
 C.4: In endemic areas,w preventive anthelminthic treatment is 
recommended for pregnant women after the first trimester as part of 
worm infection reduction programmes.x 
Context-specific 
recommendation
 Tetanus toxoid 
vaccination
 C.5: Tetanus toxoid vaccination is recommended for all pregnant women, 
depending on previous tetanus vaccination exposure, to prevent neonatal 
mortality from tetanus.y
 Recommended
 Recommendations integrated from other WHO guidelines that are relevant to ANC
 Malaria prevention: 
intermittent 
preventive 
treatment in 
pregnancy (IPTp)
 C.6: In malaria-endemic areas in Africa, intermittent preventive 
treatment with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (IPTp-SP) is recommended 
for all pregnant women. Dosing should start in the second trimester, and 
doses should be given at least one month apart, with the objective of 
ensuring that at least three doses are received.z
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 Pre-exposure 
prophylaxis (PrEP) 
for HIV prevention
 C.7: Oral pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) containing tenofovir disoproxil 
fumarate (TDF) should be offered as an additional prevention choice 
for pregnant women at substantial risk of HIV infection as part of 
combination prevention approaches.aa
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 v. Doppler ultrasound technology evaluates umbilical artery (and other fetal arteries) waveforms to assess fetal well-being in the third 
trimester of pregnancy. 
w. Areas with greater than 20% prevalence of infection with any soil-transmitted helminths.
 x. Consistent with the WHO publication Guideline: preventive chemotherapy to control soil-transmitted helminth infections in high-risk groups 
(2016, in press).
 y. This recommendation is consistent with the WHO guideline on Maternal immunization against tetanus (2006). The dosing schedule 
depends on the previous tetanus vaccination exposure.
 z. Integrated from the WHO publication Guidelines for the treatment of malaria (2015), which also states: “WHO recommends that, in areas 
of moderate-to-high malaria transmission of Africa, IPTp-SP be given to all pregnant women at each scheduled ANC visit, starting as 
early as possible in the second trimester, provided that the doses of SP are given at least 1 month apart. WHO recommends a package of 
interventions for preventing malaria during pregnancy, which includes promotion and use of insecticide-treated nets, as well as IPTp-SP”. 
To ensure that pregnant women in endemic areas start IPTp-SP as early as possible in the second trimester, policy-makers should ensure 
health system contact with women at 13 weeks of gestation.
 aa. Integrated from the WHO publication Guideline on when to start antiretroviral therapy and on pre-exposure prophylaxis for HIV (2015). 
Substantial risk of HIV infection is defined by an incidence of HIV infection in the absence of PrEP that is sufficiently high (> 3% 
incidence) to make offering PrEP potentially cost-saving (or cost-effective). Offering PrEP to people at substantial risk of HIV infection 
maximizes the benefits relative to the risks and costs.
xv Executive summary
 D. Interventions for common physiological symptoms
 Recommendation Type of 
recommendation
 Nausea and 
vomiting
 D.1: Ginger, chamomile, vitamin B6 and/or acupuncture are 
recommended for the relief of nausea in early pregnancy, based on a 
woman’s preferences and available options. 
Recommended
 Heartburn D.2: Advice on diet and lifestyle is recommended to prevent and 
relieve heartburn in pregnancy. Antacid preparations can be offered to 
women with troublesome symptoms that are not relieved by lifestyle 
modification.
 Recommended
 Leg cramps D.3: Magnesium, calcium or non-pharmacological treatment options can 
be used for the relief of leg cramps in pregnancy, based on a woman’s 
preferences and available options.
 Recommended
 Low back and 
pelvic pain
 D.4: Regular exercise throughout pregnancy is recommended to prevent 
low back and pelvic pain. There are a number of different treatment 
options that can be used, such as physiotherapy, support belts and 
acupuncture, based on a woman’s preferences and available options.
 Recommended
 Constipation D.5: Wheat bran or other fibre supplements can be used to relieve 
constipation in pregnancy if the condition fails to respond to dietary 
modification, based on a woman’s preferences and available options.
 Recommended
 Varicose veins and 
oedema
 D.6: Non-pharmacological options, such as compression stockings, 
leg elevation and water immersion, can be used for the management 
of varicose veins and oedema in pregnancy, based on a woman’s 
preferences and available options.
 Recommended
 E. Health systems interventions to improve the utilization and quality of antenatal care
 Recommendation Type of 
recommendation
 Woman-held case 
notes
 E.1: It is recommended that each pregnant woman carries her own case 
notes during pregnancy to improve continuity, quality of care and her 
pregnancy experience.
 Recommended
 Midwife-led 
continuity of care
 E.2: Midwife-led continuity-of-care models, in which a known midwife 
or small group of known midwives supports a woman throughout the 
antenatal, intrapartum and postnatal continuum, are recommended 
for pregnant women in settings with well functioning midwifery 
programmes.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 Group antenatal 
care
 E.3: Group antenatal care provided by qualified health-care professionals 
may be offered as an alternative to individual antenatal care for pregnant 
women in the context of rigorous research, depending on a woman’s 
preferences and provided that the infrastructure and resources for 
delivery of group antenatal care are available.
 Context-specific 
recommendation 
(research)
 Community-based 
interventions 
to improve 
communication 
and support
 E.4.1: The implementation of community mobilization through facilitated 
participatory learning and action (PLA) cycles with women’s groups is 
recommended to improve maternal and newborn health, particularly in 
rural settings with low access to health services.ab Participatory women’s 
groups represent an opportunity for women to discuss their needs during 
pregnancy, including barriers to reaching care, and to increase support to 
pregnant women.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 E.4.2: Packages of interventions that include household and community 
mobilization and antenatal home visits are recommended to improve 
antenatal care utilization and perinatal health outcomes, particularly in 
rural settings with low access to health services.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 ab. Integrated from WHO recommendations on community mobilization through facilitated participatory learning and action cycles with women’s 
groups for maternal and newborn health (2014).
Task shifting 
components of 
antenatal care 
deliveryac
 Recruitment and 
retention of staff 
in rural and remote 
areasae
 Antenatal care 
contact schedules 
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 E.5.1: Task shifting the promotion of health-related behaviours for 
maternal and newborn healthad to a broad range of cadres, including 
lay health workers, auxiliary nurses, nurses, midwives and doctors is 
recommended.
 E.5.2: Task shifting the distribution of recommended nutritional 
supplements and intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy (IPTp) 
for malaria prevention to a broad range of cadres, including auxiliary 
nurses, nurses, midwives and doctors is recommended.
 E.6: Policy-makers should consider educational, regulatory, financial, 
and personal and professional support interventions to recruit and retain 
qualified health workers in rural and remote areas.
 E.7: Antenatal care models with a minimum of eight contacts are 
recommended to reduce perinatal mortality and improve women’s 
experience of care.
 Recommended
 Recommended
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 Recommended
 ac. Recommendations adapted and integrated from the WHO guideline on Optimizing health worker roles to improve access to key maternal and 
newborn health interventions through task shifting (OptimizeMNH) (2012).
 ad. Including promotion of the following: care-seeking behaviour and ANC utilization; birth preparedness and complication readiness; 
sleeping under insecticide-treated bednets; skilled care for childbirth; companionship in labour and childbirth; nutritional advice; 
nutritional supplements; other context-specific supplements and interventions; HIV testing during pregnancy; exclusive breastfeeding; 
postnatal care and family planning; immunization according to national guidelines.
 ae. Recommendation adapted and integrated from the WHO publication Increasing access to health workers in remote and rural areas through 
improved retention: global policy recommendations (2010).
 xvi
1. Introduction
 1.1 Background
 International human rights law includes fundamental 
commitments of states to enable women and 
adolescent girls to survive pregnancy and childbirth 
as part of their enjoyment of sexual and reproductive 
health and rights and living a life of dignity (1). The 
World Health Organization (WHO) envisions a world 
where “every pregnant woman and newborn receives 
quality care throughout the pregnancy, childbirth and 
the postnatal period” (2). However, approximately 
303 000 women and adolescent girls died as a result 
of pregnancy and childbirth-related complications in 
2015 (3). Around 99% of maternal deaths occur in 
low-resource settings and most can be prevented (4). 
Similarly, approximately 2.6 million babies were 
stillborn in 2015, also mainly in low-resource 
settings (5). Nevertheless, there is evidence that 
effective interventions exist at reasonable cost for the 
prevention or treatment of virtually all life-threatening 
maternal complications (6), and almost two thirds 
of the global maternal and neonatal disease burden 
could be alleviated through optimal adaptation and 
uptake of existing research findings (7). But a human 
rights-based approach is not just about avoiding 
death and morbidity – it is about enabling health and 
well-being while respecting dignity and rights.
 Antenatal care (ANC) can be defined as the care 
provided by skilled health-care professionals to 
pregnant women and adolescent girls in order to 
ensure the best health conditions for both mother 
and baby during pregnancy. The components of 
ANC include: risk identification; prevention and 
management of pregnancy-related or concurrent 
diseases; and health education and health promotion.
 ANC reduces maternal and perinatal morbidity 
and mortality both directly, through detection and 
treatment of pregnancy-related complications, and 
indirectly, through the identification of women and 
girls at increased risk of developing complications 
during labour and delivery, thus ensuring referral 
to an appropriate level of care (8). In addition, as 
indirect causes of maternal morbidity and mortality, 
such as HIV and malaria infections, contribute 
to approximately 25% of maternal deaths and 
near-misses (9), ANC also provides an important 
opportunity to prevent and manage concurrent 
diseases through integrated service delivery (10).
 In low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), ANC 
utilization has increased since the introduction in 
2002 of the WHO ANC model, known as focused 
ANC (FANC) or basic ANC, which is a goal
orientated approach to delivering evidence-based 
interventions carried out at four critical times during 
pregnancy (11, 12). However, globally, during the 
period 2007–2014, only 64% of pregnant women 
attended the WHO-recommended minimum four 
contacts for ANC, suggesting that much more work 
needs to be done to address ANC utilization and 
quality.
 Currently, WHO guidance on routine ANC is 
fragmented, with related recommendations published 
across several different WHO guidelines and 
practical manuals. The 2002 FANC implementation 
manual, for example (12), does not contain relevant 
context-specific guidance, which needs to be sought 
elsewhere. In addition, evidence on the possible harm 
of the FANC model has recently become available, 
necessitating a review.
 This up-to-date, consolidated guideline for routine 
ANC has been produced by the WHO Department 
of Reproductive Health and Research (RHR), in 
collaboration with the Department of Nutrition for 
Health and Development (NHD) and the Department 
of Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health 
(MCA), as part of WHO’s normative work on 
supporting evidence-informed policies and practices. 
By reviewing, updating and bringing together ANC
related WHO recommendations regarding “what” 
should be offered and “how” it should be delivered 
in the form of this guideline, it is hoped that policy
makers will more easily be able to adapt, adopt 
and implement these new ANC recommendations, 
presented in Chapter 3, which have also been 
configured to form the 2016 WHO ANC model, 
presented in Chapter 4.
 A scoping review was conducted to inform this 
guideline, and it revealed that what women want and 
1
 Chapter 1. Introduction
1.3 Scope of the guideline
 expect from ANC is to have a “positive pregnancy 
experience”.
 n
 A positive pregnancy experience is defined as:
 n maintaining physical and sociocultural 
normality
 n
 n maintaining a healthy pregnancy for mother 
and baby (including preventing and treating 
risks, illness and death)
 n
 n having an effective transition to positive labour 
and birth, and 
n
 n achieving positive motherhood (including 
maternal self-esteem, competence and 
autonomy) (13).
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 2
 The emotional, psychological and social needs of 
adolescent girls and vulnerable groups (including 
women with disabilities, women with mental health 
concerns, women living with HIV, sex workers, 
displaced and war-affected women, ethnic and racial 
minorities, among others) can be greater than for 
other women. Therefore, the aim of this guideline is to 
provide a clear, evidence-based framework for ANC 
practices that empowers all pregnant women and 
adolescent girls to access the type of person-centred 
care that they want and need, in accordance with a 
human rights-based approach. This ANC guideline 
is part of the ongoing work of WHO in developing 
evidence-based guidelines to improve quality of 
care for mothers and their babies throughout the 
antenatal, intrapartum and postnatal continuum.
 1.2 Target audience
 The recommendations in this guideline are intended 
to inform the development of relevant national- and 
local-level health policies and clinical protocols. 
Therefore, the target audience of this guideline 
includes national and local public health policy
makers, implementers and managers of national 
and local maternal and child health programmes, 
concerned nongovernmental and other organizations, 
professional societies involved in the planning and 
management of maternal and child health services, 
health professionals (including obstetricians, 
midwives, nurses and general medical practitioners) 
and academic staff involved in training health 
professionals.
 Population of interest
 This guideline is relevant to all pregnant women and 
adolescent girls receiving ANC in any health-care 
facility or community-based setting, and to their 
unborn fetuses and newborns. While the guideline 
addresses the detection of pregnancy-related 
complications and the prevention of concurrent 
diseases at routine ANC visits, it does not address 
the subsequent treatment of such complications 
or diseases, where the consequence of detection is 
referral for additional management or specialist care 
from a different provider. Thus, the management 
of women and adolescent girls with high-risk 
pregnancies is beyond the scope of this ANC 
guideline, which is aimed at providing guidance 
on routine ANC. It is therefore complementary to 
existing WHO guidance on specific pregnancy
related complications.
 Priority questions
 The priority questions and outcomes guiding 
the evidence review and synthesis for the 
recommendations in this ANC guideline are listed 
in Web annex 1 according to the following five 
headings, which reflect the five types of interventions 
addressed by the recommendations, as presented in 
Chapter 3 of this document:
 A. Nutritional interventions
 B. Maternal and fetal assessment
 C. Preventive measures
 D. Interventions for common physiological 
symptoms
 E. Health systems interventions to improve the 
utilization and quality of ANC.
 For further information, see section 2.6: Identifying 
priority questions and outcomes. Changes made 
to the approved scope of priority questions for the 
guideline are described in Web annex 2.
3 Chapter 1. Introduction
 Outcomes of interest
 The outcomes of interests included maternal and 
fetal/neonatal outcomes, as well as test accuracy and 
health system outcomes (Box 1).
 Box 1: Guideline outcomes of interest
 Maternal outcomes Fetal/neonatal outcomes
 Infections Neonatal infections
 Anaemia Small for gestational age
 Pre-eclampsia/eclampsia Low birth weight
 Gestational diabetes mellitus Preterm birth
 Mode of delivery Congenital anomalies
 Excessive weight gain Macrosomia/large for gestational age
 Intimate partner violence Fetal/neonatal mortality
 Side-effects
 Symptomatic relief
 Maternal mortality
 Maternal satisfaction and/or women’s rating of 
usefulness of treatment
 Test accuracy outcomes Health system outcomes
 Sensitivity and specificity ANC coverage
 Facility-based delivery
2. Methods
 The guideline was developed in accordance with 
the methods described in the WHO handbook for 
guideline development (14). In summary, the process 
included: identification of priority questions and 
outcomes, retrieval of evidence, assessment 
and synthesis of the evidence, formulation 
of recommendations, and planning for the 
implementation, dissemination, impact evaluation 
and updating of the guideline.
 2.1 WHO Steering Group
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 4
 The WHO Steering Group that guided the entire 
guideline development process comprised WHO 
staff members from the Department of Reproductive 
Health and Research (RHR), the Department of 
Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health 
(MCA), and the Department of Nutrition for Health 
and Development (NHD) (see Annex 1 for the list 
of members). Regional advisors from WHO regions 
also participated in the guideline development 
process. The Steering Group drafted the initial scope 
of the guideline and drafted the key recommendation 
questions in PICO format (population, intervention, 
comparator, outcome), identified individuals to be 
invited to participate as guideline methodologists 
and as members of the systematic review teams, 
the Guideline Development Group (GDG) and 
the External Review Group (ERG), supervised the 
evidence retrieval and synthesis, organized the 
Technical Consultations (or GDG meetings), drafted 
recommendations, and finalized and published the 
guideline document. Additionally, the Steering Group 
will oversee dissemination of the guideline.
 2.2 Guideline Development Group (GDG)
 The Steering Group identified and invited 20 external 
experts and stakeholders from the six WHO regions 
to form the GDG, ensuring geographic representation, 
gender balance, and no important conflicts of 
interest. The GDG was a diverse group of individuals 
with expertise in research, guideline development 
methods, and clinical policy and programmes relating 
to interventions for ANC and service delivery, also 
including a patient/consumer representative. The 
curriculum vitae of the members were published 
on the RHR departmental website prior to the GDG 
meetings (which occurred between October 2015 
and March 2016). Subgroups were invited to each of 
the meetings based on their expertise.
 Selected members of the GDG provided input into 
the drafting of the scope of the guideline, the PICO 
questions and the prioritization of outcomes, which 
guided the evidence reviews. The GDG as a whole 
appraised the evidence used to inform the guideline, 
advised on the interpretation of this evidence, 
formulated the final recommendations at face
to-face meetings, and reviewed and approved the 
f
 inal guideline document before its submission to 
the WHO Guidelines Review Committee (GRC) for 
approval. A list of the members of the GDG can be 
found in Annex 1.
 2.3 External Review Group (ERG)
 The membership of the ERG was geographically 
and gender-balanced, and there were no important 
conflicts of interest that prohibited any member 
from serving (see Annex 1 for the list of members). 
There were six members of the ERG, including 
technical experts and other stakeholders with 
sufficient interests in the provision of evidence
based ANC. This group peer reviewed the final 
guideline document to identify any factual errors and 
comment on the clarity of the language, contextual 
issues, and implications for implementation. The 
group ensured that the guideline decision-making 
processes had considered and incorporated the 
contextual values and preferences of persons 
affected by the recommendations, including 
pregnant women, health-care professionals and 
policy-makers. It was not within the ERG’s remit to 
change recommendations previously formulated by 
the GDG.
 2.4 Technical Working Group (TWG)
 The TWG comprised systematic review teams 
and guideline methodologists. In relation to 
quantitative evidence on the effectiveness of different 
interventions, the Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth 
Group (PCG) provided input on the scoping of the 
guideline and supervised the updating of all relevant 
systematic reviews following the standard processes 
of the Cochrane Collaboration. The WHO Steering 
Group worked closely with methodologists from the 
Centro Rosarino de Estudios Perinatales (CREP), in 
Argentina, to appraise the evidence from systematic 
reviews using GRADE (Grading of Recommendations 
Assessment, Development and Evaluation) 
methodology (15).
 For qualitative data related to women’s and health
care professionals’ views on ANC, two qualitative 
meta-synthesis experts from the University of 
Central Lancashire, in the United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland (United Kingdom), 
systematically reviewed qualitative studies and 
synthesized the evidence to inform the GDG’s 
decision-making, in collaboration with the Steering 
Group and methodologists from the Norwegian Public 
Health Institute.
 In addition, methodologists from Queen Mary 
University of London, in the United Kingdom, 
conducted test accuracy reviews of diagnostic tests 
relevant to the provision of ANC to support this 
guideline. The Steering Group also worked closely 
with experts from the Norwegian Public Health 
Institute, who assisted with methodological issues 
relating to the GRADE, GRADE-CERQual (Confidence 
in the Evidence from Reviews of Qualitative Research) 
(16), and DECIDE (Developing and Evaluating 
Communication Strategies to Support Informed 
Decisions and Practice Based on Evidence) (17) tools 
(see sections 2.8, 2.10 and 2.11). In addition, the 
Steering Group consulted two researchers from the 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and 
the Norwegian Public Health Institute, who reviewed 
country case studies to investigate implementation 
issues relating to the WHO focused ANC (FANC) 
model. Members of the TWG are listed in Annex 1.
 2.5 External partners and observers
 Representatives of the International Federation of 
Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO), the International 
Confederation of Midwives (ICM), the United 
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the United States 
Agency for International Development (USAID) 
and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) 
were invited to the final GDG meeting to serve as 
observers. All these organizations are potential 
implementers of the proposed guideline with a 
history of collaboration with the WHO Departments 
of RHR and MCA in guideline dissemination and 
implementation.
 2.6 Identifying priority questions and 
outcomes
 The WHO Department of RHR, in collaboration with 
methodologists from CREP, conducted a scoping 
exercise in 2014 to identify and map clinical practice 
guidelines related to ANC. Eighty-five documents 
with ANC recommendations were identified – 15 related to routine ANC and 70 to specific 
situations relevant to ANC (18). Of the 15 related to 
routine ANC, three were issued by WHO (19–21), 
while the rest were issued by governmental and 
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in Australia, 
Canada, Hong Kong, India, Japan, Poland, the United 
Kingdom and the United States of America (USA). 
Similarly, of the 70 guidelines related to specific 
situations relevant to ANC, 91% were from Canada, 
the United Kingdom and the USA, i.e. high-income 
countries (HICs), while low- and middle-income 
countries (LMICs) were poorly represented. An 
existing, recent, up-to-date guideline relevant to 
routine ANC that was adaptable to different resource 
settings was not identified. This scoping exercise 
also informed the choice of outcomes for the ANC 
guideline, which was supplemented by outcomes 
identified by a preliminary search of the Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews for existing key 
systematic reviews relevant to the antenatal period.
 Based on these initial steps, the WHO Steering Group 
developed a framework for discussion at a scoping 
meeting, held in Geneva in April 2014, to identify 
priority questions about the provision of ANC as 
well as to inform the scoping for the guideline in 
terms of approach, focus, questions and outcomes. 
At this meeting, it was decided that the scope of 
this guideline should prioritize the applicability of 
interventions in LMIC settings. Specific genetic tests 
for detection of inherited conditions were considered 
beyond the scope of this guideline. In addition, the 
scoping process highlighted the need to identify 
women-centred interventions and outcomes for 
ANC. To this end, a qualitative systematic review was 
conducted to understand what women want, need 
and value in pregnancy and ANC (22). The findings 
of this systematic review suggested that the primary 
outcome for pregnant women is a “positive pregnancy 
experience” (as defined in section 1.1), which 
requires the provision of effective clinical practices 
(interventions and tests), relevant and timely 
information, and psychosocial and emotional support 
by practitioners with good clinical and interpersonal 
skills, within a well functioning health system. Initially 
5
 Chapter 2. Methods
a list of ANC outcomes was prioritized for the whole 
ANC period. However, due to important differences 
between the types of interventions and the range of 
potential outcomes, these outcomes were further 
prioritized separately for individual questions. 
Informed by the qualitative review of women’s views, 
including values and preferences related to ANC, we 
included assessment of maternal satisfaction with 
a particular intervention, and maternal rating of the 
usefulness of a particular intervention.
 Throughout the scoping process, the Steering Group 
consulted and engaged with other WHO departments 
that have issued guidelines with implications for the 
antenatal period, incorporating their feedback and 
technical expertise into the scoping. The process 
and approach were also presented at a number of 
meetings and international conferences between 
April 2014 and March 2015 to elicit further feedback 
from stakeholders.
 This scoping and consultation process led to the 
identification of priority questions and outcomes 
related to the effectiveness of clinical, test accuracy, 
and health systems interventions aimed at achieving 
a positive pregnancy experience that includes a 
healthy mother and a healthy baby. These questions 
and outcomes are listed in Web annex 1.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 6
 2.7 ANC-related recommendations in other 
WHO guidelines
 To avoid duplication and ensure harmonization of 
recommendations across WHO departments and 
publications, we searched all relevant WHO GRC
approved guidelines and identified 21 guidelines 
containing recommendations relevant to ANC (see 
Annex 2). These recommendations were mapped 
to the priority questions for this new guideline 
and the Steering Group reached out to the WHO 
departments and technical units that had issued the 
relevant guidance to engage and collaborate with 
them throughout the process of developing this new 
ANC guideline. Recommendations found in other 
WHO guidelines that related to health promotion 
and the identification of risk factors (e.g. smoking, 
HIV) during ANC were considered to be within the 
scope of the guideline, whereas recommendations 
on management and treatment of risk factors, 
complications and concurrent diseases were deemed 
to be beyond the scope of the guideline; for these, 
the guideline user is referred to the relevant separate 
WHO guidance via a weblink provided along with the 
“remarks” following each recommendation.
 2.8 Focus and approach
 To capture and examine the complex nature of the 
issues that are important during the ANC period, 
within the context of health systems and the 
continuum of care, the focus of this guideline is the 
essential core package of ANC that all pregnant 
women and adolescent girls should receive, with the 
f
 lexibility to employ a variety of options based on 
the context of different countries (i.e. in terms of the 
content of the model, who provides the care, where 
the care is provided, and how the care is provided to 
meet women’s needs). Therefore, the overarching 
questions addressed by this guideline focused on the 
following:
 n
 n What are the evidence-based practices during the 
ANC period for improving outcomes related to the 
following?
 n
 n
 n
 n– nutritional interventions (see section 3.A)– maternal and fetal assessment (see section 3.B)– preventive measures (see section 3.C)– interventions for common physiological 
symptoms (see section 3.D)
 n
 n How should these evidence-based practices be 
delivered to improve outcomes?
 n– health systems interventions to improve the 
utilization and quality of ANC (see section 3.E).
 The guideline focuses on the core ANC clinical 
package that all women should receive at routine 
ANC visits. The management of identified 
complications or concurrent diseases or risk factors 
that require additional treatment or specialist care 
and follow-up is beyond the scope of this guideline.
 The DECIDE framework is a tool that has been 
developed to help decision-makers consider a range 
of relevant criteria, including benefits, harms, values, 
resources, equity, acceptability and feasibility (17). To 
synthesize and examine evidence across the domains 
of DECIDE (see section 2.11), the preparatory work for 
the ANC guideline was organized according to five 
work streams, using both quantitative and qualitative 
data sources, as summarized in Box 2.
Box 2: Five work streams for preparation of the ANC guideline
 ANC guideline work streams Methodology
 Individual interventions for clinical 
practices and delivery of ANC
 Antenatal testing
 Barriers and facilitators to access to 
and provision of ANC
 Large-scale programme review/
 country case studies of ANC
 Effectiveness reviews, systematic 
reviews
 Test accuracy reviews
 Qualitative evidence synthesis
 Assessment of evidence
 GRADE
 GRADE
 GRADE-CERQual
 Mixed-methods review, focusing 
on contextual and health system 
factors affecting implementation
 Health-system level interventions to 
improve access to and provision of 
ANC services
 Effectiveness reviews
 2.9 Evidence identification and retrieval
 Evidence to support this guideline was derived from 
a number of sources by the Technical Working Group 
(TWG) of methodologists and systematic review 
teams that worked closely with the Steering Group. 
Evidence on effectiveness was mostly derived from 
Cochrane reviews of randomized controlled trials 
(RCTs). The Steering Group, in collaboration with 
the Cochrane PCG and methodologists from CREP, 
initially identified all Cochrane systematic reviews 
and protocols relevant to ANC. The Cochrane 
PCG Trials Register1 was searched for new trials 
and the relevant systematic reviews were updated 
accordingly. The updating or completion of Cochrane 
reviews was a collaborative process between authors 
of the individual reviews, staff of the PCG, and 
methodologists from CREP.
 Not applicable
 GRADE
 assessed and rated by reviewers to be at low, high 
or unclear risk of bias for sequence generation, 
allocation concealment, blinding of study personnel 
and participants, attrition, selective reporting and 
other sources of bias, such as publication bias. The 
assessment of these six criteria provides an overall 
risk of bias that indicates the likely magnitude and 
direction of the bias and how it is likely to impact the 
review findings.
 The WHO Steering Group and the methodologists in 
the TWG determined the suitability of each Cochrane 
systematic review to provide the evidence base for 
the key PICO questions. For suitable reviews, CREP 
methodologists retrieved the evidence relevant to 
ANC guideline outcomes, which was evaluated 
according to standard operating procedures approved 
by the Steering Group.
 Assessment of the quality of individual studies 
included in Cochrane reviews of intervention 
studies follows specific and explicit methods for 
assessing the risk of bias using six standard criteria 
outlined in the Cochrane handbook for systematic 
reviews of interventions (23). Each included study is 
1 The Cochrane PCG Trials Register is maintained by the 
PCG’s Trial Search Coordinator and contains trials identified 
from: monthly searches of the Cochrane Central Register of 
Controlled Trials (CENTRAL); weekly searches of MEDLINE; 
weekly searches of Embase; hand-searches of 30 journals 
and the proceedings of major conferences; weekly “current 
awareness” alerts for a further 44 journals; and monthly 
BioMed Central email alerts (24). For further information, see: 
http://pregnancy.cochrane.org/pregnancy-and-childbirth
groups-trials-register
 If a low-quality review or no systematic review was 
identified on a priority question, a new systematic 
review was commissioned from external experts. This 
was the case with all DTA reviews, the qualitative 
reviews on women’s and health-care providers’ 
views on ANC, and the review on “factors affecting 
ANC intervention implementation at country 
level”. In these instances, the external researchers 
were asked to prepare standard protocols before 
embarking on the systematic reviews, including clear 
PICO questions, criteria for identification of studies 
(including search strategies for different bibliographic 
databases), methods for assessing risk of bias and the 
plan for data analysis. The protocols were reviewed 
and endorsed by the Steering Group and selected 
7
 Chapter 2. Methods
content experts among the GDG members. WHO 
information retrieval specialists reviewed the search 
strategies.
 In addition to the Cochrane review evidence, for 
three questions related to health systems (i.e. 
those on women-held case notes, group ANC, and 
interventions to communicate with and support 
pregnant women), indirect evidence was sought, 
due to a paucity of direct evidence. This work was 
commissioned from experts at the Norwegian Public 
Health Institute who conducted a systematic search 
for indirect evidence on effects of these interventions 
covering the preceding five years (i.e. from January 
2011 to January 2016), but found no additional 
evidence.
 The DTA reviews on haemoglobin and urine tests 
were commissioned from methodologists from 
Queen Mary University of London, in the United 
Kingdom. For these reviews, Embase, LILACS, 
MEDLINE (OVID), SCOPUS and Web of Science were 
searched from inception to January 2015, and grey 
literature was sought by searching GreyOpen.
 Two qualitative reviews were commissioned from 
experts from the University of Central Lancashire, 
United Kingdom:
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 8
 1. To explore the views, attitudes and experiences of 
pregnant and postnatal women in high-, medium- 
and low-income countries in relation to factors 
that might form barriers to, or facilitators of, their 
use of routine ANC services.
 2. To explore the views, attitudes and experiences of 
health-care providers in high-, medium- and low
income countries in relation to factors that might 
form barriers to, or facilitators of, their provision of 
good quality routine ANC services.
 Studies published before 2000 were excluded, to 
ensure that the data reflected the current generation 
of women who may encounter ANC, and the current 
generation of ANC providers. This date range was 
also intended to capture the time period since the 
2002 introduction of the WHO FANC or “basic”  
ANC model, which includes four goal-orientated  
ANC visits (12).
 Finally, two researchers from the London School of 
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and the Norwegian 
Public Health Institute undertook a review of case 
studies reporting the experiences of countries. 
The review focused on methods of uptake and 
implementation of the WHO FANC model, problems 
experienced by service users and other stakeholders, 
and the broader context. Data were collected 
from published studies, reports and other policy 
documents (see the Web supplement2 for the search 
strategy), and semi-structured interviews with key 
stakeholders for each country case study, which 
included Argentina, Kenya, Thailand and the United 
Republic of Tanzania.
 The entire systematic review development process 
was iterative, with the methodologists in constant 
communication with the Steering Group to discuss 
challenges and agree on solutions. The search 
strategies for evidence identification and retrieval can 
be found in Web supplement.
 2.10 Quality assessment and grading of the 
evidence
 The GRADE approach (15) to appraising the quality 
of quantitative evidence was used for all the critical 
outcomes identified in the PICOs, and a GRADE 
profile was prepared for each quantitative outcome 
within each PICO. Accordingly, the quality of evidence 
for each outcome was rated as “high”, “moderate”, 
“low”, or “very low” based on a set of criteria. As 
a baseline, RCTs provided “high-quality” evidence, 
while non-randomized trials and observational 
studies provided “low-quality” evidence. This 
baseline quality rating was then downgraded based 
on consideration of risk of bias, inconsistency, 
imprecision, indirectness and publication bias. For 
observational studies, other considerations, such as 
magnitude of effect, could lead to upgrading of the 
rating if there were no limitations that indicated a 
need for downgrading. Grading of Cochrane review 
evidence and DTA evidence was performed by CREP 
and the methodologists from Queen Mary University 
of London, respectively, in accordance with standard 
operating procedures approved by the Steering Group.
 Studies identified for the qualitative reviews were 
subjected to a simple quality appraisal system using 
a validated instrument that rated studies against 11 
criteria, and then allocated a score from A to D, with 
D indicating the presence of significant flaws that 
are very likely to affect the credibility, transferability, 
dependability and/or confirmability of the study (25). 
2 Available at: www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/
 maternal_perinatal_health/anc-positive-pregnancy-experience/
 en/
Studies scoring D were excluded on grounds of poor 
quality.
 The findings of the qualitative reviews were appraised 
for quality using the GRADE-CERQual tool (16, 26). 
The GRADE-CERQual tool, which uses a similar 
approach conceptually to other GRADE tools, 
provides a transparent method for assessing and 
assigning the level of confidence that can be placed 
in evidence from reviews of qualitative research. The 
qualitative review team used the GRADE-CERQual 
tool to assess the confidence in qualitative review 
f
 indings, which were assigned to evidence domains 
on values, acceptability and feasibility according to 
four components: methodological limitations of the 
individual studies, adequacy of data, coherence and 
relevance to the review question of the individual 
studies contributing to a review finding.
 2.11 Formulation of the recommendations
 The Steering Group supervised and finalized the 
preparation of evidence summaries and evidence 
profiles in collaboration with the guideline 
methodologists, using the DECIDE framework (17). 
DECIDE is an evidence-to-decision (EtD) tool that 
includes explicit and systematic consideration of 
evidence on interventions in terms of six domains: 
effects, values, resources, equity, acceptability and 
feasibility. For each priority question, judgements 
are made on the impact of the intervention on each 
of these domains, in order to inform and guide 
the decision-making process. Using the DECIDE 
framework, the Steering Group created summary 
documents for each priority question covering 
evidence on each of the six domains.
 n
 n Effects: The evidence on maternal and perinatal 
outcomes was described. Where benefits clearly 
outweighed harms, or vice versa, there was a 
greater likelihood of a clear judgement in favour 
of or against the option, respectively. Uncertainty 
about the net benefits or harms and small net 
benefits often led to a judgement that neither 
favoured the intervention nor the comparator. The 
higher the certainty of evidence on benefits across 
outcomes, the higher the likelihood of a judgement 
in favour of the intervention.
 n
 n Values: This relates to the relative importance 
assigned to the outcomes of the intervention by 
those affected by them, how such importance 
varies within and across settings, and whether this 
importance is surrounded by any uncertainty. A 
scoping review of what women want from ANC 
informed the ANC guideline (13). Evidence showed 
that women from high-, middle- and low-resource 
settings generally valued having a “positive 
pregnancy experience” achieved through three 
equally important ANC components – effective 
clinical practices (interventions and tests), relevant 
and timely information, and psychosocial and 
emotional support – each provided by practitioners 
with good clinical and interpersonal skills within 
a well functioning health system. Reviewers 
had high confidence in the evidence. Therefore, 
interventions that facilitated this composite 
outcome were more likely to lead to a judgement in 
favour of the intervention.
 n
 n Resources: The most relevant resources in 
the context of the implementation of the ANC 
interventions in this guideline mainly included 
costs for providing medicines, supplies, equipment 
and skilled human resources. A judgement in 
favour or against the intervention was likely 
where the resource implications were clearly 
advantageous or disadvantageous. Cost evaluation 
relied on reported estimates obtained during 
the evidence retrieval process, a 2013 treatment 
assumption report (27), the WHO compendium 
of innovative health technologies for low-resource 
settings (28), as well as experiences and opinions 
of the GDG members. It was recognized that 
actual costing of interventions is context-specific 
and not feasible for a global guideline.
 n
 n Equity: This section was informed by the 2015 
WHO report on inequalities in reproductive, 
maternal, newborn and child health, which 
showed that women in LMICs who are poor, least 
educated, and residing in rural areas have lower 
ANC coverage and worse pregnancy outcomes 
than the more advantaged women in LMICs (29). 
Their neonates also have worse health outcomes. 
Therefore, judgements were more likely to favour 
the interventions if they could reduce health 
differences among different groups of women and 
their families.
 n
 n Acceptability: Qualitative evidence from the 
systematic reviews on women's and providers’ 
views informed judgements for this domain. The 
lower the acceptability, the lower the likelihood of 
a judgement in favour of the intervention.
 9
 Chapter 2. Methods
n
 n Feasibility: Feasibility is influenced by factors 
such as the resources available, infrastructure and 
training. Qualitative evidence from the systematic 
reviews and country case studies informed 
judgements for this domain. Where barriers 
existed, it was less likely that a judgement would 
be made in favour of the intervention.
 Additional evidence of potential harms or unintended 
consequences was described in the “additional 
considerations” sub-section of each evidence 
summary (see text for each recommendation 
presented in Chapter 3).
 Three types of draft recommendation were made, 
namely:
 n
 n Recommended
 n
 n Context-specific recommendation:
 n
 n
 n
 n– only in the context of rigorous research– only with targeted monitoring and evaluation– only in other specific contexts
 n Not recommended.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 10
 In the absence of evidence of benefits, evidence of 
potential harm led to a recommendation against 
the option. Where evidence of potential harm was 
found for interventions that were also found to 
have evidence of important benefits, depending on 
the level of certainty and likely impact of the harm, 
such evidence of potential harm was more likely to 
lead to a context-specific recommendation for the 
intervention (where the context is explicitly stated 
within the recommendation).
 These evidence summaries and draft 
recommendations, including GRADE tables and other 
related documents, were provided to members of the 
GDG for comments in advance of the series of three 
Technical Consultations on the ANC guideline. The 
certainty of the graded evidence on effectiveness 
was systematically interpreted in the text according 
to guidance on reporting review evidence from the 
Cochrane Effective Practice and Organization of Care 
(EPOC) Group (30).
 The GDG members and other participants were 
subsequently invited to attend three Technical 
Consultations (also called GDG meetings) organized 
at the WHO headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland, 
the first two in October 2015 and the third in March 
2016 (see Annex 1 for a full list of participants) to 
review the evidence and formulate recommendations 
for the ANC guideline. At these meetings, under the 
leadership of the GDG chair, GDG members reviewed 
the evidence summaries, the draft recommendations 
and any comments received through preliminary 
feedback. The purpose of the meetings was to 
reach consensus on each judgement and each 
recommendation, including its direction and context 
(if any), and to discuss implementation, monitoring 
and evaluation, and research priorities related to the 
recommendations.
 2.12 Decision-making during the GDG 
meetings
 The GDG meetings were guided by a clear protocol. 
Each of the three meetings was designed to allow 
participants to discuss each of the recommendations 
drafted by the Steering Group. Where necessary, 
each of these recommendations was revised 
through a process of group discussion. The final 
adoption of each recommendation was confirmed 
by consensus (i.e. full agreement among all 
GDG members). The GDG also determined the 
context of recommendations at the meetings 
by the same process of consensus, based on 
discussions around the balance of evidence on 
benefits and disadvantages of the interventions 
across the domains evaluated. If GDG members 
had been unable to reach a consensus, the disputed 
recommendation, or any other decision, would have 
been put to a vote, by a show of hands.
 2.13 Declaration of interests (DOI) by 
external contributors
 In accordance with the WHO handbook for guideline 
development (14), all GDG members, ERG members 
and other external collaborators were asked to 
declare in writing any competing interests (whether 
academic, financial or other) at the time of the 
invitation to participate in the ANC guideline 
development process. The standard WHO form 
for DOI was completed and signed by each expert 
and sent electronically to the responsible technical 
officer. The WHO Steering Group reviewed all the 
DOI forms before finalizing experts’ invitations to 
participate. All experts were instructed to notify the 
responsible technical officer of any change in relevant 
interests during the course of the process, in order to 
update and review conflicts of interest accordingly. 
In addition, experts were requested to submit an 
electronic copy of their curriculum vitae along with 
the completed DOI form. The responsible technical 
officer collated and reviewed signed DOI forms and 
curriculum vitae, in conjunction with the director of 
the WHO Department of RHR and, with input from 
the Steering Group, determined whether a conflict of 
interest existed. Where any conflict of interest was 
declared, the Steering Group determined whether it 
was serious enough to affect the individual’s ability 
to make objective judgements about the evidence 
or recommendations. To ensure consistency, the 
Steering Group applied the criteria for assessing the 
severity of a conflict of interest in the WHO handbook 
for guideline development (14).
 All findings from the received DOI statements 
were managed in accordance with the WHO DOI 
guidelines on a case-by-case basis. Where a conflict 
of interest was not considered significant enough to 
pose any risk to the guideline development process 
or reduce its credibility, the expert was only required 
to declare such conflict at the GDG meeting and no 
further action was taken. Conflicts of interest that 
warranted action by WHO staff arose where experts 
had performed primary research or a systematic 
review related to any guideline recommendations; 
in such cases, the experts were restricted from 
participating in discussions and/or formulating any 
recommendation related to the area of their conflict 
of interest. At the final GDG meeting, members 
were required again to state any conflicts of interest 
openly to the entire group, and were required to 
submit a signed and updated version of their earlier 
DOI statements. A summary of the DOI statements 
and information on how conflicts of interest were 
managed are included in Annex 3.
 2.14 Document preparation and peer 
review
 Following these three GDG meetings, members of the 
Steering Group prepared a draft of the full guideline 
document with revisions to accurately reflect the 
deliberations and decisions of the GDG participants. 
This draft guideline was then sent electronically to 
the GDG participants for further comments before 
it was sent to the ERG. The Steering Group carefully 
evaluated the input of the peer reviewers for inclusion 
in the guideline document and made revisions to the 
guideline draft as needed. After the GDG meetings 
and peer review process, further modifications to 
the guideline by the Steering Group were limited to 
corrections of factual errors and improvements in 
language to address any lack of clarity. The revised 
f
 inal version was returned electronically to the GDG 
for final approval.
 2.15 Presentation of guideline content
 A summary of the recommendations is presented in 
Table 1 within the executive summary at the beginning 
of this guideline. As evidence was evaluated for 
several outcomes and six domains (effects, values, 
resources, equity, acceptability, feasibility) for 
each recommendation, we have not presented the 
decisions on quality of evidence in this summary 
table. Summary tables of the main considerations 
(including certainty of the evidence on effects) for 
each recommendation are presented in Web annex 3.
 The “Evidence and recommendations” section of 
the guideline (Chapter 3) summarizes the evidence 
and other considerations reviewed by the GDG at 
the Technical Consultations. To improve readability, 
the “values” domain has been described (and 
highlighted in a box entitled “Women’s values”) at 
the beginning of each section for the five types of 
interventions, instead of for each recommendation, 
to avoid repetition. The language used to interpret 
the Cochrane review evidence on effects is consistent 
with the EPOC approach (30). Evidence assessed as 
being of very low certainty is not presented in the 
text, but can be found in the Web supplement.
 The Steering Group consolidated recommendations 
into this guideline from other recent, GRC-approved 
WHO guidelines relevant to the provision of 
comprehensive, integrated routine ANC to women 
in certain contexts or for certain conditions. In most 
instances, these recommendations are identical 
to those found in the specific separate guideline. 
Where we have integrated recommendations, 
the strength of the recommendation and quality 
of the evidence as determined by the respective 
GDGs for those guidelines has been recorded in 
the remarks section of the recommendation. Such 
recommendations are indicated by a footnote 
in the ANC guideline text specifying that the 
recommendation has been “integrated from” the 
specific guideline. A few recommendations required 
adaptation for the purposes of the ANC guideline, 
and the Steering Group consulted the relevant WHO 
departments that produced the specific guidance 
to confirm that adaptations were consistent with 
original recommendations. Such recommendations 
11
 Chapter 2. Methods
are indicated by a footnote in the ANC guideline 
text specifying that the recommendation has 
been “adapted and integrated from” the specific 
guideline. An example of where this was done is 
for the recommendation on task shifting, where the 
recommendations on multiple interventions were 
adapted to apply to the task shifting of routine ANC 
interventions only. In all instances, guideline users 
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 12
 are referred to the specific WHO guidance for more 
details, including implementation considerations, 
for these recommendations. Implementation of the 
ANC guideline and recommendations is discussed 
in Chapter 4, and implementation considerations 
related to each GDG recommendation can be found 
in Annex 4.
3. Evidence and recommendations
 This ANC guideline includes 39 recommendations 
adopted by the Guideline Development Group 
(GDG), and 10 recommendations relevant to ANC 
that have been consolidated into this guideline 
from other existing WHO guidelines that have 
been recently approved by the Guidelines Review 
Committee (GRC). Evidence on the effectiveness of 
interventions was derived from 47 systematic reviews 
(41 Cochrane systematic reviews, 2 test accuracy 
reviews and 4 non-Cochrane reviews of non
randomized studies) and was summarized in GRADE 
tables. A scoping review of what women want from 
ANC and what outcomes matter to women informed 
the values domain. Two qualitative systematic 
reviews on women’s and providers’ views and a 
review of country case studies contributed evidence 
on the acceptability and feasibility of interventions. 
Evidence and considerations on equity and resources 
also informed the GDG recommendations.
 This chapter provides the recommendations with 
the corresponding narrative summaries, grouped 
according to the type of intervention, namely:
 A. Nutritional interventions
 B. Maternal and fetal assessment
 C. Preventive measures
 D. Interventions for common physiological 
symptoms
 E. Health systems interventions to improve the 
utilization and quality of ANC.
 The corresponding GRADE tables for 
recommendations are referred to in this chapter as 
“evidence base” (EB) tables, numbered according 
to the specific recommendations they refer to. 
These tables are presented separately in the 
Web supplement to this document.3 Evidence-to
decision tables with GDG judgements related to 
the evidence and considerations for all domains 
are presented in Web annex 3 of this guideline. 
In addition, implementation considerations and 
research priorities related to these recommendations, 
based on the GDG discussions during the Technical 
Consultations, can be found in the next chapters of 
the guideline (Chapter 4: Implementation of the ANC 
guideline and recommendations; Chapter 5: Research 
implications).
 3 Available at: www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/
 maternal_perinatal_health/anc-positive-pregnancy-experience/
 en/
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
13
A. Nutritional interventions
 Background
 Pregnancy requires a healthy diet that includes 
an adequate intake of energy, protein, vitamins 
and minerals to meet maternal and fetal needs. 
However, for many pregnant women, dietary intake 
of vegetables, meat, dairy products and fruit is often 
insufficient to meet these needs, particularly in low- 
and middle-income countries (LMICs) where multiple 
nutritional deficiencies often co-exist. In resource
poor countries in sub-Saharan Africa, south-central 
and south-east Asia, maternal undernutrition is highly 
prevalent and is recognized as a key determinant of 
poor perinatal outcomes (31). However, obesity and 
overweight is also associated with poor pregnancy 
outcomes and many women in a variety of settings 
gain excessive weight during pregnancy. While 
obesity has historically been a condition associated 
with affluence, there is some evidence to suggest a 
shift in the burden of overweight and obesity from 
advantaged to disadvantaged populations (32).
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 14
 Anaemia is associated with iron, folate and vitamin 
A deficiencies. It is estimated to affect 38.2% of 
pregnant women globally, with the highest prevalence 
in the WHO regions of South-East Asia (48.7%) and 
Africa (46.3%), medium prevalence in the Eastern 
Mediterranean Region (38.9%) and the lowest 
prevalence in the WHO regions of the Western 
Pacific (24.3%), the Americas (24.9%) and Europe 
(25.8%) (33).
 Major contributory factors to anaemia include 
parasitic infections such as malaria, hookworm and 
schistosomiasis, in areas where these infections 
are endemic. In addition, chronic infections such as 
tuberculosis (TB) and HIV, and haemoglobinopathies 
such as sickle-cell disease, contribute to the 
prevalence of anaemia. It is estimated that 0.8 million 
pregnant women globally have severe anaemia 
(defined as a blood haemoglobin concentration 
< 70 g/L) (33). In pregnancy, severe anaemia is 
associated with an increased risk of maternal and 
infant mortality (34). It is estimated that about half of 
the anaemia found in pregnant women is amenable 
to iron supplementation (33); however, this may 
be quite variable and is likely to be much lower in 
malaria-endemic areas.
 In addition to causing anaemia, iron deficiency 
adversely affects the use of energy sources by 
muscles and, thus, physical capacity and work 
performance, and also adversely affects immune 
status and morbidity from infections (35). Folate 
(vitamin B9) deficiency, in addition to anaemia it is 
also linked to fetal neural tube defects (36). Vitamin A 
deficiency affects about 19 million pregnant women, 
mostly in Africa and South-East Asia, causing night 
blindness (37).
 Calcium deficiency is associated with an increased 
risk of pre-eclampsia (38), and deficiencies of other 
vitamins and minerals, such as vitamin E, C, B6 and 
zinc, have also been postulated to play a role in 
pre-eclampsia. Zinc deficiency is associated with 
impaired immunity (39). Vitamin C intake enhances 
iron absorption from the gut; however, zinc, iron 
and other mineral supplements may compete 
for absorption, and it is unclear whether such 
interactions have health consequences (39).
 For the ANC guideline, the GDG evaluated the 
evidence on various vitamin and mineral supplements 
that might theoretically lead to improved maternal 
and perinatal outcomes. In addition, as both 
undernourishment and overnourishment may have 
negative consequences for pregnant women and 
their babies, the GDG also evaluated evidence on 
the effects of various dietary interventions to reduce 
the impact of these conditions. Caffeine is possibly 
the most widely used psychoactive substance in the 
world (40), and the GDG also evaluated evidence 
on the impact, if any, of caffeine restriction during 
pregnancy.
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 15
 A.1: Dietary interventions
 A1.1: Counselling on healthy eating and physical activity
 RECOMMENDATION A.1.1: Counselling about healthy eating and keeping physically active 
during pregnancy is recommended for pregnant women to stay healthy and to prevent excessive 
weight gain during pregnancy. (Recommended)
 Remarks
 • A healthy diet contains adequate energy, protein, vitamins and minerals, obtained through the 
consumption of a variety of foods, including green and orange vegetables, meat, fish, beans, nuts, whole 
grains and fruit (41).
 • Stakeholders may wish to consider culturally appropriate healthy eating and exercise interventions 
to prevent excessive weight gain in pregnancy, particularly for populations with a high prevalence of 
overweight and obesity, depending on resources and women’s preferences. Interventions should be 
woman-centred and delivered in a non-judgemental manner, and developed to ensure appropriate weight 
gain (see further information in points below).
 • A healthy lifestyle includes aerobic physical activity and strength-conditioning exercise aimed at 
maintaining a good level of fitness throughout pregnancy, without trying to reach peak fitness level or 
train for athletic competition. Women should choose activities with minimal risk of loss of balance and 
fetal trauma (42).
 • Most normal gestational weight gain occurs after 20 weeks of gestation and the definition of “normal” is 
subject to regional variations, but should take into consideration pre-pregnant body mass index (BMI). 
According to the Institute of Medicine classification (43), women who are underweight at the start of 
pregnancy (i.e. BMI < 18.5 kg/m2) should aim to gain 12.5–18 kg, women who are normal weight at the 
start of pregnancy (i.e. BMI 18.5–24.9 kg/m2) should aim to gain 11.5–16 kg, overweight women (i.e. BMI 
25–29.9 kg/m2) should aim to gain 7–11.5 kg, and obese women(i.e. BMI > 30 kg/m2) should aim to gain 
5–9 kg.
 • Most evidence on healthy eating and exercise interventions comes from high-income countries (HICs), 
and the GDG noted that that there are at least 40 ongoing trials in HICs in this field. The GDG noted that 
research is needed on the effects, feasibility and acceptability of healthy eating and exercise interventions 
in LMICs.
 • Pregnancy may be an optimal time for behaviour change interventions among populations with a high 
prevalence of overweight and obesity, and the longer-term impact of these interventions on women, 
children and partners needs investigation.
 • The GDG noted that a strong training package is needed for practitioners, including standardized 
guidance on nutrition. This guidance should be evidence-based, sustainable, reproducible, accessible and 
adaptable to different cultural settings.
 Women’s values
 A scoping review of what women want from ANC and what outcomes they value informed the ANC guideline (13). 
Evidence showed that women from high-, medium- and low-resource settings valued having a positive pregnancy 
experience, the components of which included the provision of effective clinical practices (interventions and tests, 
including nutritional supplements), relevant and timely information (including dietary and nutritional advice) and 
psychosocial and emotional support, by knowledgeable, supportive and respectful health-care practitioners, to 
optimize maternal and newborn health (high confidence in the evidence).
Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of diet and exercise interventions 
compared with no diet and exercise 
interventions (EB Table A.1.1)
 The evidence on the effects of healthy eating and 
exercise interventions was derived from a Cochrane 
review that included 65 randomized controlled trials 
(RCTs), mostly conducted in HICs (44). Thirty-four 
trials recruited women from the general population 
(i.e. women of a wide range of BMIs at baseline), 
24 trials recruited overweight and/or obese women 
and seven recruited women defined as being at 
high risk of gestational diabetes. In total, 49 RCTs 
involving 11 444 women contributed data to the 
review’s meta-analyses. Diet interventions were 
defined as a special selection of food or energy 
intake to which a participant was restricted, which 
were most commonly “healthy eating” types of diets. 
Exercise interventions were defined by reviewers as 
any activity requiring physical effort, carried out to 
sustain or improve health or fitness, and these were 
either prescribed/unsupervised (e.g. 30 minutes of 
daily walking), supervised (e.g. a weekly supervised 
group exercise class) or both. These interventions 
were usually compared with “standard ANC” and 
aimed to prevent excessive gestational weight gain 
(EGWG).
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 16
 Most trials recruited women between 10 and 20 
weeks of gestation. There was substantial variation 
in the number of contacts (i.e. counselling/exercise 
sessions), type of intervention and method of 
delivery. Data were grouped according to the type 
of intervention (i.e. diet only, exercise only, diet and 
exercise counselling, diet and supervised exercise) 
and the average effects across trials were estimated 
using the random effects model. Separate analyses 
were performed according to type of intervention and 
the risk of weight-related complications. Most data 
in the overall analyses were derived from trials of 
combined diet and exercise interventions.
 Maternal outcomes
 High-certainty evidence shows that women receiving 
diet and/or exercise interventions as part of ANC to 
prevent EGWG are less likely to experience EGWG 
(24 trials, 7096 women; relative risk [RR]: 0.80, 
95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.73–0.87; absolute 
effect of 91 fewer women with EGWG per 1000 on 
average). Subgroup analyses were consistent with 
these findings.
 High-certainty evidence shows that diet and/or 
exercise interventions have little or no effect on pre
eclampsia risk (15 trials, 5330 women; RR: 0.95, 95% 
CI: 0.77–1.16). However, moderate-certainty evidence 
indicates that diet and/or exercise interventions 
probably prevent hypertension in pregnancy (11 trials, 
5162 women; RR: 0.70, 95% CI: 0.51–0.96).
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that diet and/or 
exercise interventions may have little or no effect on 
caesarean section (28 trials, 7534 women; RR: 0.95, 
95% CI: 0.88–1.03); however, low-certainty evidence 
from the diet and exercise counselling subgroup 
of trials suggests that reductions in caesarean 
section rates may be possible with this intervention 
(9 trials, 3406 women; RR: 0.87, 95% CI: 0.75–1.01). 
Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that diet 
and/or exercise interventions probably make little or 
no difference to induction of labour (8 trials, 3832 
women; RR: 1.06, 95% CI: 0.94–1.19).
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that diet and/
 or exercise interventions may reduce the risk of 
gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) (19 trials, 7279 
women; RR: 0.82, 95% CI: 0.67–1.01).
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence suggests that diet 
and/or exercise interventions probably prevent 
neonatal macrosomia (27 trials, 8598 women; RR: 
0.93, 95% CI: 0.86–1.02), particularly in overweight 
and obese women receiving diet and exercise 
counselling interventions (9 trials, 3252 neonates; 
RR: 0.85, 95% CI: 0.73–1.00). However, moderate
certainty evidence indicates that diet and exercise 
interventions probably have little or no effect on 
neonatal hypoglycaemia (4 trials, 2601 neonates; 
RR: 0.95, 95% CI: 0.76–1.18) or shoulder dystocia 
(4 trials, 3253 neonates; RR: 1.02, 95% CI: 0.57–1.83). 
Low-certainty evidence suggests that neonatal 
respiratory morbidity may occur less frequently with 
diet and exercise counselling interventions than 
controls, particularly among overweight and obese 
women (2 studies, 2256 women; RR: 0.47, 95% CI: 
0.26–0.85).
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that diet and/or 
exercise interventions may have little or no effect on 
preterm birth (16 trials, 5923 women; RR: 0.91, 95% 
CI: 0.68–1.22), and the evidence on low-birth-weight 
neonates is very uncertain. Perinatal mortality was 
not reported in the review.
Additional considerations
 n
 n High-certainty evidence from the review also 
shows that low gestational weight gain is more 
likely to occur with these interventions (11 trials, 
4422 women; RR: 1.14, CI: 1.02–1.27); the clinical 
relevance of this finding is not known.
 n
 n The effects, acceptability and feasibility of diet 
and exercise interventions in LMICs has not been 
established.
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: 
Background (p. 15).
 Resources
 Cost implications of diet and exercise interventions 
for health services are highly variable. For example, 
supervised diet and exercise interventions can 
have high associated costs, mainly due to staff 
costs for time spent supervising, while counselling 
interventions might have relatively low costs. For 
pregnant women, the interventions might also have 
resource implications in terms of transport costs, 
time off work and child-minding costs, particularly if 
the intervention requires additional antenatal visits.
 Equity
 Most of the evidence came from trials conducted 
in HICs. Recent studies have reported a shift 
in the burden of overweight and obesity from 
advantaged to disadvantaged populations (32). Such 
a trend increases the risk of associated pregnancy 
complications, as well as cardiometabolic problems, 
among pregnant women from disadvantaged 
populations. These risks might be further exacerbated 
among women in low-resource community settings, 
as these settings may not be equipped to deal with 
complications.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence indicates that women in a 
variety of settings tend to view ANC as a source 
of knowledge and information and that they 
generally appreciate any advice (including dietary 
or nutritional) that may lead to a healthy baby and 
a positive pregnancy experience (high confidence in 
the evidence) (22). It also suggests that women may 
be less likely to engage with health services if advice 
is delivered in a hurried or didactic manner (high 
confidence in the evidence) (22). Therefore, these 
types of interventions are more likely to be acceptable 
if the interventions are delivered in an unhurried 
and supportive way, which may also facilitate better 
engagement with ANC services. Qualitative evidence 
on health-care providers’ views of ANC suggests 
that they may be keen to offer general health-care 
advice and specific pregnancy-related information 
(low confidence in the evidence) but they sometimes 
feel they do not have the appropriate training and 
lack the resources and time to deliver the service in 
the informative, supportive and caring manner that 
women want (high confidence in the evidence) (45).
 Feasibility
 In a number of LMIC settings, providers feel that 
a lack of resources may limit implementation of 
recommended interventions (high confidence in the 
evidence) (45).
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
17
A.1.2: Nutrition education on energy and protein intake
 RECOMMENDATION A.1.2: In undernourished populations, nutrition education on increasing 
daily energy and protein intake is recommended for pregnant women to reduce the risk of low
birth-weight neonates. (Context-specific recommendation)
 Remarks
 • Undernourishment is usually defined by a low BMI (i.e. being underweight). For adults, a 20–39% 
prevalence of underweight women is considered a high prevalence of underweight and 40% or higher 
is considered a very high prevalence (46). Mid-upper arm circumference (MUAC) may also be useful to 
identify protein–energy malnutrition in individual pregnant women and to determine its prevalence in this 
population (31). However, the optimal cut-off points may need to be determined for individual countries 
based on context-specific cost–benefit analyses (31).
 • Anthropometric characteristics of the general population are changing, and this needs to be taken into 
account by regularly reassessing the prevalence of undernutrition to ensure that the intervention remains 
relevant.
 • The GDG noted that a strong training package is needed for practitioners, including standardized 
guidance on nutrition. This guidance should be evidence-based, sustainable, reproducible, accessible and 
adaptable to different cultural settings.
 • Stakeholders might wish to consider alternative delivery platforms (e.g. peer counsellors, media 
reminders) and task shifting for delivery of this intervention.
 • Areas that are highly food insecure or those with little access to a variety of foods may wish to consider 
additional complementary interventions, such as distribution of balanced protein and energy supplements 
(see Recommendation A.1.3).
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 18
 Effects of nutritional education to increase 
energy and protein intake versus no nutritional 
education intervention (EB Table A.1.2)
 Evidence on the effects of nutritional education was 
derived from a Cochrane review (47). Five trials 
conducted between 1975 and 2013 in Bangladesh, 
Greece and the USA, involving 1090 pregnant 
women, contributed data to this comparison. 
Nutritional education interventions were delivered 
one-to-one or in group classes and included 
education to improve the “quality” of diet, increase 
energy and protein intake, or improve knowledge 
of the nutritional value of different foods, including 
energy, protein, vitamins and iron. The Bangladesh 
study also involved cookery demonstrations.
 Maternal outcomes
 Evidence on gestational weight gain was of very low 
certainty. There was no other evidence available on 
maternal outcomes in the review for this comparison.
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence shows that antenatal dietary 
education may reduce low-birth-weight neonates 
(300 women; RR: 0.04, 95% CI: 0.01–0.14), but may 
have little or no effect on small-for-gestational-age 
(SGA) neonates (2 trials, 449 women; RR: 0.46, 
95% CI: 0.21–0.98), stillbirths (1 trial, 431 women; 
RR: 0.37, 95% CI: 0.07–1.90) or neonatal deaths 
(1 trial, 448 women; RR: 1.28, 95% CI: 0.35–4.72). 
Evidence on preterm birth was judged to be of very 
low certainty.
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: 
Background (p. 15).
 Resources
 Resource costs are variable and mainly related to 
staffing and counselling time.
 Equity
 In many LMICs, pregnancy outcomes and ANC 
coverage are worse among women who are poor, 
least educated and residing in rural areas (29). 
Many low-income countries still struggle with 
widespread poverty and hunger, particularly among 
rural populations (48). Findings from a study of 
antenatal food supplementation and micronutrient 
supplements in rural Bangladesh suggest that food 
supplementation interventions might be associated 
with better ANC adherence among women with 
less education but not among those with more 
education (49). Therefore, providing antenatal food 
supplements could help to address inequalities by 
improving maternal nutritional status and increasing 
ANC coverage among disadvantaged women.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence indicates that women in a 
variety of settings tend to view ANC as a source 
of knowledge and information and that they 
generally appreciate any advice (including dietary 
or nutritional) that may lead to a healthy baby and 
a positive pregnancy experience (high confidence in 
the evidence) (22). It also suggests that women may 
be less likely to engage with health services if advice 
is delivered in a hurried or didactic manner (high 
confidence in the evidence) (22). Therefore, these 
types of interventions are more likely to be acceptable 
if the interventions are delivered in an unhurried 
and supportive way, which may also facilitate better 
engagement with ANC services. Qualitative evidence 
on health-care providers’ views of ANC suggests 
that they may be keen to offer general health-care 
advice and specific pregnancy-related information 
(low confidence in the evidence) but they sometimes 
feel they do not have the appropriate training and 
lack the resources and time to deliver the service in 
the informative, supportive and caring manner that 
women want (high confidence in the evidence) (45).
 Feasibility
 In a number of LMIC settings, providers feel that 
a lack of resources may limit implementation of 
recommended interventions (high confidence in the 
evidence) (45).
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
19
A.1.3: Energy and protein dietary supplements
 RECOMMENDATION A.1.3: In undernourished populations, balanced energy and protein dietary 
supplementation is recommended for pregnant women to reduce the risk of stillbirths and small
for-gestational-age neonates. (Context-specific recommendation)
 Remarks
 • The GDG stressed that this recommendation is for populations or settings with a high prevalence 
of undernourished pregnant women, and not for individual pregnant women identified as being 
undernourished.
 • Undernourishment is usually defined by a low BMI (i.e. being underweight). For adults, a 20–39% 
prevalence of underweight women is considered a high prevalence of underweight and 40% or higher is 
considered a very high prevalence (46). MUAC may also be useful to identify protein–energy malnutrition 
in individual pregnant women and to determine its prevalence in this population (31). However, the 
optimal cut-off points may need to be determined for individual countries based on context-specific cost
benefit analyses (31).
 • Establishment of a quality assurance process is important to guarantee that balanced energy and 
protein food supplements are manufactured, packaged and stored in a controlled and uncontaminated 
environment. The cost and logistical implications associated with balanced energy and protein 
supplements might be mitigated by local production of supplements, provided that a quality assurance 
process is established.
 • A continual, adequate supply of supplements is required for programme success. This requires a clear 
understanding and investment in procurement and supply chain management.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 20
 • Programmes should be designed and continually improved based on locally generated data and 
experiences. Examples relevant to this guideline include:– Improving delivery, acceptability and utilization of this intervention by pregnant women (i.e. 
overcoming supply and utilization barriers).– Distribution of balanced energy and protein supplements may not be feasible only through the 
local schedule of ANC visits; additional visits may need to be scheduled. The costs related to these 
additional visits should be considered. In the absence of antenatal visits, too few visits, or when the 
f
 irst visit comes too late, consideration should be given to alternative platforms for delivery (e.g. 
community health workers, task shifting in specific settings).– Values and preferences related to the types and amounts of balanced energy and protein supplements 
may vary.
 • Monitoring and evaluation should include evaluation of household-level storage facilities, spoilage, 
wastage, retailing, sharing and other issues related to food distribution.
 • Each country will need to understand the context-specific etiology of undernutrition at the national and 
sub-national levels. For instance, where seasonality is a predictor of food availability, the programme 
should consider this and adapt to the conditions as needed (e.g. provision of more or less food of 
different types in different seasons). In addition, a better understanding is needed of whether alternatives 
to energy and protein supplements – such as cash or vouchers, or improved local and national food 
production and distribution – can lead to better or equivalent results.
 • Anthropometric characteristics of the general population are changing, and this needs to be taken into 
account to ensure that only those women who are likely to benefit (i.e. only undernourished women) are 
included.
 • The GDG noted that it is not known whether there are risks associated with providing this intervention to 
women with a high BMI.
Summary of evidence and considerations
 Equity
 Effects of balanced energy and protein 
supplements compared with no supplements or 
placebo (EB Table A.1.3)
 Evidence on the effects of balanced energy and protein 
supplements compared with no supplementation or 
placebo was derived from a Cochrane review (47). 
Twelve trials, involving 6705 women, were included 
in this comparison. Most data were derived from 
trials conducted in LMICs, including Burkina Faso, 
Colombia, Gambia, Ghana, India, Indonesia, South 
Africa and Taiwan, China. The balanced energy and 
protein supplements used were in various forms, 
including fortified beverages, biscuits and powders.
 Maternal outcomes
 The only maternal outcome reported for this 
comparison in the review, of those outcomes 
prioritized for this guideline, was pre-eclampsia. 
However, the evidence on this outcome, based on two 
small trials, was assessed as very uncertain.
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence shows that balanced 
energy and protein supplementation probably 
reduces SGA neonates (7 trials, 4408 women; RR: 
0.79, 95% CI: 0.69–0.90) and stillbirths (5 trials, 
3408 women; RR: 0.60, 95% CI: 0.39–0.94), but 
probably has no effect on preterm birth (5 trials, 
3384 women; RR: 0.96, 95% CI: 0.80–1.16). Low
certainty evidence suggests that it may have little or 
no effect on neonatal deaths (5 trials, 3381 women; 
RR: 0.68, 95% CI: 0.43–1.07). Low birth weight was 
not reported for this comparison in the review.
 Additional considerations
 n
 n In the review, mean birth weight (in grams) was 
reported and the findings favoured the balanced 
energy and protein supplementation group 
(11 trials, 5385 neonates; mean difference [MD]: 
40.96, 95% CI: 4.66–77.26). This evidence was 
graded as moderate-quality evidence in the review 
(47).
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: 
Background (p. 15).
 Resources
 The cost of balanced energy and protein supplements 
is relatively high. There may also be cost implications 
with respect to transport, storage and training.
 In many LMICs, pregnancy outcomes and ANC 
coverage are worse among women who are poor, 
least educated and residing in rural areas (29). 
Many low-income countries still struggle with 
widespread poverty and hunger, particularly among 
rural populations (48). Findings from a study of 
antenatal food supplementation and micronutrient 
supplements in rural Bangladesh suggest that food 
supplementation interventions might be associated 
with better ANC adherence among women with 
less education but not among those with more 
education (49). Therefore, providing antenatal food 
supplements could help to address inequalities by 
improving maternal nutritional status and increasing 
ANC coverage among disadvantaged women.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence indicates that women in a 
variety of settings tend to view ANC as a source 
of knowledge and information and that they 
generally appreciate any advice (including dietary 
or nutritional) that may lead to a healthy baby and 
a positive pregnancy experience (high confidence in 
the evidence) (22). It also suggests that women may 
be less likely to engage with health services if advice 
is delivered in a hurried or didactic manner (high 
confidence in the evidence) (22). Therefore, these 
types of interventions are more likely to be acceptable 
if the interventions are delivered in an unhurried 
and supportive way, which may also facilitate better 
engagement with ANC services. Qualitative evidence 
on health-care providers’ views of ANC suggests 
that they may be keen to offer general health-care 
advice and specific pregnancy-related information 
(low confidence in the evidence) but they sometimes 
feel they do not have the appropriate training and 
lack the resources and time to deliver the service in 
the informative, supportive and caring manner that 
women want (high confidence in the evidence) (45).
 Feasibility
 Providing balanced protein and energy supplements 
may be associated with logistical issues, as 
supplements are bulky and will require adequate 
transport and storage facilities to ensure continual 
supplies. Qualitative evidence from LMIC settings 
indicates that providers feel that a lack of resources 
may limit implementation of recommended 
interventions (high confidence in the evidence) (45).
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
21
A.1.4: High-protein supplements
 RECOMMENDATION A.1.4: In undernourished populations, high-protein supplementation 
is not recommended for pregnant women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes. (Not 
recommended)
 Remarks
 • The GDG noted that there is insufficient evidence on the benefits, if any, of high-protein supplementation.
 • Further research on the effects of high-protein supplements in undernourished populations is not 
considered a research priority.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of high-protein supplementation 
compared with controls (EB Table A.1.4)
 Evidence on the effects of high-protein 
supplementation was derived from the same 
Cochrane review as for Recommendations A.1.2 
and A.1.3 (47). The review included one trial of 
high-protein supplementation compared with a 
micronutrient supplement conducted in the 1970s, 
involving 1051 low-income, black women in the USA.
 Maternal outcomes
 None of the outcomes prioritized for this guideline 
were reported for this comparison in the review.
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 22
 High-certainty evidence shows that high-protein 
supplementation increases SGA neonates (1 trial, 
505 neonates; RR: 1.58, 95% CI: 1.03–2.41). 
Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that high
protein supplementation probably has little or no 
effect on preterm birth (1 study, 505 women; RR: 1.14, 
95% CI: 0.83–1.56). Low-certainty evidence suggests 
that high-protein supplementation may have little or 
no effect on stillbirths (1 trial, 529 babies; RR: 0.81, 
95% CI: 0.31–2.15; certainty of evidence downgraded 
due to imprecision) and neonatal deaths (1 trial, 
529 neonates; RR: 2.78, 95% CI: 0.75–10.36).
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: 
Background (p. 15).
 Resources
 The cost of high-protein supplements is relatively 
high. There may also be cost implications with 
respect to transport, storage and training.
 Equity
 In many LMICs, pregnancy outcomes and ANC 
coverage are worse among women who are poor, 
least educated and residing in rural areas (29). Many 
low-income countries still struggle with widespread 
poverty and hunger, particularly among rural 
populations (48). Therefore, providing antenatal food 
supplements could help to address inequalities by 
improving maternal nutritional status and increasing 
ANC coverage among disadvantaged women.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence indicates that women in a 
variety of settings tend to view ANC as a source 
of knowledge and information and that they 
generally appreciate any advice (including dietary 
or nutritional) that may lead to a healthy baby and 
a positive pregnancy experience (high confidence 
in the evidence) (22). It also suggests that women 
may be less likely to engage with health services if 
advice is delivered in a hurried or didactic manner 
(high confidence in the evidence) (22). Qualitative 
evidence on health-care providers’ views of ANC 
suggests that they may be keen to offer general 
health-care advice and specific pregnancy-related 
information (low confidence in the evidence) but 
they sometimes feel they do not have the appropriate 
training and lack the resources and time to deliver 
the service in the informative, supportive and caring 
manner that women want (high confidence in the 
evidence) (45).
 Feasibility
 Providing high-protein supplements may be 
associated with logistical issues, as supplements are 
bulky and will require adequate transport and storage 
facilities to ensure continual supplies. Qualitative 
evidence from LMIC settings indicates that providers 
feel that a lack of resources may limit implementation 
of recommended interventions (high confidence in 
the evidence) (45).
A.2: Iron and folic acid supplements
 A.2.1: Daily iron and folic acid supplements
 RECOMMENDATION A.2.1: Daily oral iron and folic acid supplementation with 30 mg to 
60 mg of elemental irona and 400 µg (0.4 mg) folic acidb is recommended for pregnant 
women to prevent maternal anaemia, puerperal sepsis, low birth weight, and preterm birth.c 
(Recommended)
 Remarks
 • This recommendation supersedes the 2012 WHO Guideline: daily iron and folic acid supplementation in 
pregnant women (36) and should be considered alongside Recommendation A.2.2 on intermittent iron.
 • In settings where anaemia in pregnant women is a severe public health problem (i.e. where at least 40% 
of pregnant women have a blood haemoglobin [Hb] concentration < 110 g/L), a daily dose of 60 mg of 
elemental iron is preferred over a lower dose. 
• In the first and third trimesters, the Hb threshold for diagnosing anaemia is 110 g/L; in the second 
trimester, the threshold is 105 g/L (50). 
• If a woman is diagnosed with anaemia during pregnancy, her daily elemental iron should be increased 
to 120 mg until her Hb concentration rises to normal (Hb 110 g/L or higher) (34, 51). Thereafter, she can 
resume the standard daily antenatal iron dose to prevent recurrence of anaemia.
 • Effective communication with pregnant women about diet and healthy eating – including providing 
information about food sources of vitamins and minerals, and dietary diversity – is an integral part of 
preventing anaemia and providing quality ANC. 
• Effective communication strategies are vital for improving the acceptability of, and adherence to, 
supplementation schemes. 
• Stakeholders may need to consider ways of reminding pregnant women to take their supplements and of 
assisting them to manage associated side-effects.
 • In areas with endemic infections that may cause anaemia through blood loss, increased red cell 
destruction or decreased red cell production, such as malaria and hookworm, measures to prevent, 
diagnose and treat these infections should be implemented.
 • Oral supplements are available as capsules or tablets (including soluble tablets, and dissolvable and 
modified-release tablets) (52). Establishment of a quality assurance process is important to guarantee 
that supplements are manufactured, packaged and stored in a controlled and uncontaminated 
environment (53).
 • A better understanding of the etiology of anaemia (e.g. malaria endemnicity, haemoglobinopathies) and 
the prevalence of risk factors is needed at the country level, to inform context-specific adaptations of this 
recommendation.
 • Standardized definitions of side-effects are needed to facilitate monitoring and evaluation.
 • Development and improvement of integrated surveillance systems are needed to link the assessment of 
anaemia and iron status at the country level to national and global surveillance systems.
 • To reach the most vulnerable populations and ensure a timely and continuous supply of supplements, 
stakeholders may wish to consider task shifting the provision of iron supplementation in community 
settings with poor access to health-care professionals (see Recommendation E.6.1, in section E: Health 
systems interventions to improve the utilization and quality of ANC).
 a The equivalent of 60 mg of elemental iron is 300 mg of ferrous sulfate hepahydrate, 180 mg of ferrous fumarate or 500 mg of ferrous gluconate.
 b Folic acid should be commenced as early as possible (ideally before conception) to prevent neural tube defects.
 c This recommendation supersedes the previous WHO recommendation found in the 2012 Guideline: daily iron and folic acid supplementation in pregnant women 
(36).
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
23
Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of any daily iron and folic acid 
supplements compared with no daily iron and 
folic acid supplements (EB Table A.2.1)
 The evidence on the effects of daily iron and/or 
folic acid was derived from a Cochrane review of 
61 trials conducted in low-, middle- and high-income 
countries (54). Twenty-three trials were conducted 
in countries with some malaria risk, of which two 
reported malaria outcomes. Overall, 44 trials 
involving 43 274 women contributed data to the 
review’s meta-analyses. The trials compared daily 
oral iron supplementation, with or without folic acid 
or other vitamin and mineral supplements, with 
various control groups (folic acid only, placebo, no 
intervention, other vitamin and mineral supplements 
without iron or folic acid). Most of the evidence was 
derived from studies comparing iron supplementation 
with no iron supplementation. In most trials, women 
began taking supplements before 20 weeks of 
gestation and continued taking supplements until 
delivery. The most commonly used dose of elemental 
iron was 60 mg daily (range: 30–240 mg) and that of 
folic acid was 400 µg daily.
 Maternal outcomes
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 24
 Anaemia was reported in many different ways and 
at different time points during pregnancy and the 
puerperium. Low-certainty evidence shows that 
daily iron supplementation may reduce the risk of 
anaemia at term (defined as blood Hb concentration 
< 110 g/L at 37 weeks of gestation or later) (14 trials, 
2199 women; RR: 0.30, 95% CI: 0.19–0.46) and 
severe postpartum anaemia (defined as Hb < 80 g/L) 
(8 trials, 1339 women; RR: 0.04, 95% CI: 0.01–0.28).
 Low-certainty evidence also shows that daily 
iron supplementation may increase maternal Hb 
concentrations at or near term (34 weeks of gestation 
or more) (19 trials, 3704 women; MD: 8.88 g/L 
higher, 95% CI: 6.96–10.8 g/L) and may increase the 
proportion of women with a high maternal Hb at or 
near term (Hb > 130 g/L at 34 weeks of gestation 
or later) (8 trials, 2156 women; RR: 3.07, 95% CI: 
1.18–8.02).
 Regarding maternal morbidity, moderate-certainty 
evidence shows that daily iron supplementation 
probably reduces the risk of maternal puerperal 
infections (4 trials, 4374 women; RR: 0.68, 95% CI: 
0.5–0.92). Low-certainty evidence shows that daily 
iron supplementation may have little or no effect on 
pre-eclampsia (4 trials, 1704 women; RR: 1.63, 95% 
CI: 0.87–3.07) and antepartum haemorrhage (2 trials, 
1157 women; RR: 1.48, 95% CI: 0.51–4.31), and 
moderate-certainty evidence shows that it probably 
has little or no effect on postpartum haemorrhage 
(4 trials, 1488 women; RR: 0.93, 95% CI: 0.59–1.49). 
Evidence on other morbidity outcomes, including 
placental abruption and blood transfusions, is of very 
low certainty.
 Low-certainty evidence shows that daily iron 
supplementation may have little or no effect on 
maternal mortality (2 trials, 12 560 women; RR: 
0.33, 95% CI: 0.01–8.19). Women’s satisfaction was 
evaluated in one small trial (49 women), which found 
little difference between daily iron and control groups.
 Side-effects: Moderate-certainty evidence indicates 
that daily iron supplementation probably has little or 
no effect on the risk of experiencing any side-effect 
(11 trials, 2425 women; RR: 1.29, 95% CI: 0.83–2.02), 
and that it may have little or no effect on constipation 
(4 trials, 1495 women; RR: 0.95, 95% CI: 0.62–1.43), 
heartburn (3 trials, 1323 women; RR: 1.19, 95% CI: 
0.86–1.66) and vomiting (4 trials, 1392 women; RR: 
0.88, 95% CI: 0.59–1.30). Evidence that daily iron 
has little or no effect on nausea is of low certainty 
(4 trials, 1377 women; RR: 1.21, 95% CI: 0.72–2.03). 
High-certainty evidence shows that diarrhoea is 
less common with daily iron supplements (3 trials, 
1088 women; RR: 0.55, 95% CI: 0.32–0.93).
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence shows that daily iron 
may reduce the risk of low-birth-weight neonates 
(< 2500 g) (11 trials, 17 613 neonates; RR: 0.84, 95% 
CI: 0.69–1.03). High-certainty evidence shows that 
it does not reduce the risk of preterm birth before 37 
weeks of gestation (13 trials, 19 286 women; RR: 0.93, 
95% CI: 0.84–1.03), but it does reduce the risk of very 
preterm birth (i.e. less than 34 weeks of gestation) 
(5 trials, 3749 women; RR: 0.51, 95% CI: 0.29–0.91).
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that daily iron may 
have little or no effect on congenital anomalies (4 
trials, 14 636 neonates; RR: 0.88, 95% CI: 0.58–1.33). 
Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that daily iron 
probably has little or no effect on neonatal deaths (4 
trials, 16 603 neonates; RR: 0.91, 95% CI: 0.71–1.18). 
Neonatal infections and SGA were not reviewed as 
outcomes.
n
 Additional considerations
 n Evidence from subgroups tended to be consistent 
with the overall findings for the main outcomes. 
More details can be found in the Web supplement 
(EB Table A.2.1).
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: 
Background (p. 15).
 Resources
 Daily iron and folic acid supplements are relatively 
low cost, at less than 1 United States dollar (US$ 1) 
per pregnant woman (27).
 Equity
 Iron deficiency and parasitic infections are more 
common in LMICs and disadvantaged populations. 
Poor, rural and least-educated populations also 
experience the highest maternal, infant and child 
mortality (29). Increasing coverage of effective 
nutritional interventions to prevent anaemia, 
particularly among disadvantaged populations, 
might help to address maternal and newborn health 
inequalities.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence suggests that the availability of 
iron supplements may actively encourage women to 
engage with ANC providers (low confidence in the 
evidence) (22). However, where there are additional 
costs associated with supplementation or where 
the supplements may be unavailable (because of 
resource constraints) women are less likely to engage 
with ANC services (high confidence in the evidence). 
Lower doses of iron may be associated with fewer 
side-effects and therefore may be more acceptable to 
women than higher doses.
 Feasibility
 Qualitative evidence about the views of health-care 
providers suggests that resource constraints, both in 
terms of the availability of the supplements and the 
lack of suitably trained staff to deliver them, may limit 
implementation (high confidence in the evidence) 
(45).
 A.2.2: Intermittent iron and folic acid supplements
 RECOMMENDATION A.2.2: Intermittent oral iron and folic acid supplementation with 120 mg 
of elemental irona and 2800 µg (2.8 mg) of folic acid once weekly is recommended for pregnant 
women to improve maternal and neonatal outcomes if daily iron is not acceptable due to side
effects, and in populations with an anaemia prevalence among pregnant women of less than 
20%. (Context-specific recommendation)
 Remarks
 • This recommendation supersedes the previous WHO recommendation in the 2012 Guideline: intermittent 
iron and folic acid supplementation in non-anaemic pregnant women (55) and should be considered 
alongside Recommendation A.1.1.
 • In general, anaemia prevalence of less than 20% is classified as a mild public health problem (33).
 • Before commencing intermittent iron supplementation, accurate measurement of maternal blood Hb 
concentrations is needed to confirm the absence of anaemia. Therefore, this recommendation may require 
a strong health system to facilitate accurate Hb measurement and to monitor anaemia status throughout 
pregnancy.
 • If a woman is diagnosed with anaemia (Hb < 110 g/L) during ANC, she should be given 120 mg of 
elemental iron and 400 µg (0.4 mg) of folic acid daily until her Hb concentration rises to normal (Hb 110 
g/L or higher) (34, 51). Thereafter, she can continue with the standard daily antenatal iron and folic acid 
dose (or the intermittent regimen if daily iron is not acceptable due to side-effects) to prevent recurrence 
of anaemia.
 • Stakeholders may need to consider ways of reminding pregnant women to take their supplements on an 
intermittent basis and of assisting them to manage associated side-effects.
 a The equivalent of 120 mg of elemental iron is 600 mg of ferrous sulfate hepahydrate, 360 mg of ferrous fumarate or 1000 mg of ferrous gluconate.
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
25
Summary of evidence and considerations
 very uncertain. Maternal infections and maternal 
satisfaction were not evaluated in the review.
 Effects of intermittent iron and folic acid 
supplements compared with daily iron and folic 
acid supplements (EB Table A.2.2)
 The evidence on the effects of intermittent iron and 
folic acid was derived from a Cochrane review that 
included 27 trials from 15 countries; however, only 
21 trials (involving 5490 women) contributed data 
to the review’s meta-analyses (56). All trials were 
conducted in LMICs with some degree of malaria 
risk (Argentina, Bangladesh, China, Guatemala, 
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Malawi, 
Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, Republic of Korea, Sri 
Lanka, Thailand and Viet Nam); however, only one 
trial specifically reported that it was conducted in a 
malaria-endemic area.
 Most of the intermittent iron regimens involved 
women taking weekly supplements, most commonly 
120 mg elemental iron per week (range: 80–200 mg 
weekly), which was compared with daily regimens, 
most commonly 60 mg elemental iron daily (range: 
40–120 mg daily). Where folic acid was also 
provided in the trials, it was administered weekly in 
the intermittent supplement groups (range: 400
3500 µg weekly) compared with the usual standard 
daily dose for control groups.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 26
 Maternal outcomes
 Anaemia was reported in different ways across 
trials. Low-certainty evidence suggests there may 
be little or no difference between intermittent 
and daily iron supplementation in the effect on 
anaemia at term (4 trials, 676 women; RR: 1.22, 
95% CI: 0.84–1.80). Moderate-certainty evidence 
shows that anaemia at or near term (defined as a 
Hb of < 110 g/L at 34 weeks of gestation or later) 
probably occurs more frequently with intermittent 
than daily iron supplementation (8 trials, 1385 
women; RR: 1.66, 95% CI: 1.09–2.53), and that 
intermittent iron supplementation is probably less 
likely to be associated with a Hb concentration of 
more than 130 g/L than daily iron (15 trials, 2616 
women; RR: 0.53, 95% CI: 0.38–0.74). No events of 
severe anaemia occurred in either group in six trials 
reporting this outcome (1240 women). The evidence 
on mean Hb concentrations at or near term and 
severe postpartum anaemia is of very low certainty.
 Limited evidence on maternal morbidity from 
one small trial (110 women) was assessed as 
Side-effects: Moderate-certainty evidence shows 
that intermittent iron supplementation is probably 
less commonly associated with nausea than daily iron 
supplementation (7 trials, 1034 women; RR: 0.60, 
95% CI: 0.37–0.97). However, the evidence on 
other specific side-effects (constipation, diarrhoea, 
heartburn or vomiting) or any side-effect is of very 
low certainty.
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that intermittent 
iron supplementation may have a similar effect 
to daily iron supplementation on low birth weight 
(< 2500 g) (8 trials, 1898 neonates; RR: 0.82, 95% 
CI: 0.50–1.22). However, the evidence on preterm 
birth and very preterm birth was assessed as 
very uncertain. Evidence on the relative effects of 
intermittent versus daily iron supplementation on 
neonatal mortality is also very uncertain. Neonatal 
infections and SGA outcomes were not included in 
the review.
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: 
Background (p. 15).
 Resources
 Intermittent iron and folic acid supplementation 
might cost a little less than daily iron and folic acid 
supplementation due to the lower total weekly dose 
of iron.
 Equity
 Intermittent iron and folic acid supplementation may 
have less impact on health inequalities than daily iron 
and folic acid supplementation, as anaemia is more 
common in disadvantaged populations.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence suggests that the availability of 
iron supplements may actively encourage women to 
engage with ANC providers (low confidence in the 
evidence) (22). However, where there are additional 
costs associated with supplementation or where 
the supplements may be unavailable (because of 
resource constraints) women are less likely to engage 
with ANC services (high confidence in the evidence). 
Women may find intermittent iron supplementation 
more acceptable than daily iron supplementation, 
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 27
 particularly if they experience side-effects with daily 
iron supplements.
 Feasibility
 Intermittent iron may be more feasible in some low
resource settings if it costs less than daily iron.
 A.3: Calcium supplements
 RECOMMENDATION A.3: In populations with low dietary calcium intake, daily calcium 
supplementation (1.5–2.0 g oral elemental calcium) is recommended for pregnant women to 
reduce the risk of pre-eclampsia. (Context-specific recommendation)
 Remarks
 • This recommendation is consistent with the 2011 WHO recommendations for prevention and treatment of 
pre-eclampsia and eclampsia (57) (strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence) and supersedes 
the WHO recommendation found in the 2013 Guideline: calcium supplementation in pregnant women (38).
 • Dietary counselling of pregnant women should promote adequate calcium intake through locally 
available, calcium-rich foods.
 • Dividing the dose of calcium may improve acceptability. The suggested scheme for calcium 
supplementation is 1.5–2 g daily, with the total dose divided into three doses, preferably taken at 
mealtimes.
 • Negative interactions between iron and calcium supplements may occur. Therefore, the two nutrients 
should preferably be administered several hours apart rather than concomitantly (38).
 • As there is no clear evidence on the timing of initiation of calcium supplementation, stakeholders may 
wish to commence supplementation at the first ANC visit, given the possibility of compliance issues.
 • To reach the most vulnerable populations and ensure a timely and continuous supply of supplements, 
stakeholders may wish to consider task shifting the provision of calcium supplementation in community 
settings with poor access to health-care professionals (see Recommendation E.6.1, in section E: Health 
systems interventions to improve the utilization and quality of ANC).
 • The implementation and impact of this recommendation should be monitored at the health service, 
regional and country levels, based on clearly defined criteria and indicators associated with locally agreed 
targets. Successes and failures should be evaluated to inform integration of this recommendation into the 
ANC package.
 • Further WHO guidance on prevention and treatment of pre-eclampsia and eclampsia is 
available in the 2011 WHO recommendations (57), available at: http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/44703/1/9789241548335_eng.pdf
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of calcium supplements compared 
with no calcium supplements (for outcomes 
other than hypertension/pre-eclampsia) 
(EB Table A.3)
 Evidence on the effects of calcium supplements on 
outcomes other than hypertension/pre-eclampsia 
was derived from a Cochrane systematic review (58). 
The review included data from 23 trials involving 
18 587 pregnant women. The aim of the review was 
to determine the effect of calcium on maternal and 
perinatal outcomes other than hypertension. There 
is a separate Cochrane review on the latter (59), 
which has been referenced to support existing WHO 
recommendations on calcium supplementation to 
prevent pre-eclampsia in populations with low dietary 
calcium intake (38, 57).
 In 14 trials, daily calcium doses ranged from 
1000 mg to 2000 mg, and in the remainder it was 
less than 1000 mg. Eleven trials started calcium 
supplementation at or after 20 weeks of gestation, 
five trials started before 20 weeks, and the rest did 
not specify when supplementation was initiated. The 
primary outcome of 16 of the trials was pregnancy
induced hypertension. For outcomes other than 
hypertension, few trials contributed to each outcome; 
this is the evidence presented in this section.
Maternal outcomes
 High-certainty evidence shows that calcium 
supplementation does not have important effects 
on maternal anaemia (1 trial, 1098 women; RR: 
1.04, 95% CI: 0.90–1.22) or caesarean section rates 
(9 trials, 7440 women; RR: 0.99, 95% CI: 0.89–1.10). 
Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that calcium 
supplementation probably has little or no effect on 
maternal mortality (2 trials, 8974 women; RR: 0.29, 
95% CI: 0.06–1.38) and probably makes little or 
no difference to the risk of urinary tract infections 
(3 trials, 1743 women; RR: 0.95, 95% CI: 0.69–1.30). 
Low-certainty evidence suggests that calcium 
supplementation may make little or no difference 
to maternal weight gain (3 trials; MD: –29.46 g per 
week, 95% CI: –119.80 to 60.89 g per week). Maternal 
satisfaction was not reported in any of the trials 
included in the Cochrane review.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 28
 Side-effects: Calcium supplementation makes little 
or no difference to the risk of “any side-effect”, a 
composite outcome including headache, vomiting, 
backache, swelling, vaginal and urinary complaints, 
dyspepsia and abdominal pain (1 trial, 8312 women; 
RR: 1.02, 95% CI: 0.93–1.12), and probably makes little 
or no difference to the risk of urinary stones (3 trials, 
13 419 women; RR: 1.11, 95% CI: 0.48–2.54), renal colic 
(1 trial, 8312 women; RR: 1.67, 95% CI: 0.40–6.99) and 
impaired renal function (1 trial, 4589 women; RR: 0.91, 
95% CI: 0.51–1.64), all assessed as moderate-certainty 
evidence. Low-certainty evidence suggests that it may 
have little or no effect on the risk of gallstones (1 trial, 
518 women; RR: 1.35, 95% CI: 0.48–3.85).
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Calcium supplementation probably has little or no ef
fect on low-birth-weight babies (< 2500 g), as indicat
ed by evidence that was of moderate certainty due to 
inconsistency (6 trials, 14 162 women; RR: 0.93, 95% 
CI: 0.81–1.07). Low-certainty evidence suggests that it 
may have little or no effect on preterm birth before 37 
weeks of gestation (13 trials, 16 139 women; RR: 0.86, 
95% CI: 0.70–1.05). However, when trials are stratified 
by dose (< 1000 mg vs ≥ 1000 mg), moderate-certain
ty evidence shows that high-dose calcium supplemen
tation probably reduces preterm birth (12 trials, 15 479 
women; RR: 0.81, 95% CI: 0.66–0.99).
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that calcium 
supplementation may make little or no difference 
to perinatal mortality (8 trials, 15 785 women; RR: 
0.87, 95% CI: 0.72–1.06), and moderate-certainty 
evidence shows that it probably has little or no effect 
on stillbirths or fetal deaths (6 trials, 15 269 women; 
RR: 0.91, 95% CI: 0.72–1.14).
 Additional considerations
 n
 n In the WHO recommendations for prevention and 
treatment of pre-eclampsia and eclampsia (2011), the 
recommendation on calcium states: “In areas where 
dietary calcium intake is low, calcium supplementa
tion during pregnancy (at doses of 1.5–2.0 g elemen
tal calcium/day) is recommended for the prevention 
of pre-eclampsia in all women, but especially in 
those at high risk of developing pre-eclampsia 
(strong recommendation)” (57). This recommenda
tion is based on moderate-quality evidence showing 
a 64% risk reduction (CI: 35–80%) in pre-eclamp
sia among women or populations with low baseline 
dietary calcium intake (57).
 n
 n In considering the evidence from the review of 
“non-hypertensive” effects, the GDG agreed 
that the effect of calcium on preterm birth is 
probably not distinct from the effect on preventing 
pre-eclampsia, as preterm birth is frequently a 
consequence of pre-eclampsia.
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: 
Background (p. 15).
 Resources
 The GDG noted that the cost of calcium (3 × 1 tablet 
600 mg per day for 6 months = US$ 11.50) (27) is 
relatively high compared with supplements such as 
iron and folic acid. The weight of the supplement may 
also have cost and logistical implications with respect 
to storage and transport.
 Equity
 In many LMICs, women who are poor, least educated 
and residing in rural areas have worse pregnancy 
outcomes than do more advantaged women (29). 
Preterm birth is the most common cause of neonatal 
mortality, with the majority of deaths occurring in 
LMICs. Therefore, effective nutritional interventions in 
disadvantaged populations aimed at reducing preterm 
birth could help to address health inequalities.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence indicates that women in a variety 
of settings tend to view ANC as a source of knowledge 
and information and that they generally appreciate any 
advice (including dietary or nutritional) that may lead 
to a healthy baby and a positive pregnancy experience 
(high confidence in the evidence) (22). However, 
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 29
 calcium carbonate tablets might be unpalatable 
to many women, as they can be large and have a 
powdery texture (59). In addition, this intervention 
usually involves taking three tablets a day, which 
significantly increasing the number of tablets a woman 
is required to take on a daily basis (i.e. in addition to 
iron and folic acid). This could have implications for 
both acceptability and compliance, which needs to be 
assessed in a programmatic context.
 Feasibility
 In addition to the cost, providing calcium 
supplements may be associated with logistical issues 
(e.g. supplements are bulky and require adequate 
transport and storage to maintain stock in facilities) 
and other challenges (e.g. forecasting). Qualitative 
evidence on health-care providers’ views suggests that 
resource constraints may limit implementation (high 
confidence in the evidence) (45).
 A.4: Vitamin A supplements
 RECOMMENDATION A.4: Vitamin A supplementation is only recommended for pregnant 
women in areas where vitamin A deficiency is a severe public health problem, to prevent night 
blindness. (Context-specific recommendation)
 Remarks
 • This recommendation supersedes the previous WHO recommendation found in the 2011 Guideline: 
vitamin A supplementation in pregnant women (60).
 • Vitamin A is not recommended to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes.
 • Vitamin A deficiency is a severe public health problem if 5% or more of women in a population have 
a history of night blindness in their most recent pregnancy in the previous 3–5 years that ended in a 
live birth, or if 20% or more of pregnant women have a serum retinol level below 0.70 µmol/L (61). 
Determination of vitamin A deficiency as a public health problem involves estimating the prevalence of 
deficiency in a population by using specific biochemical and clinical indicators of vitamin A status.
 • Pregnant women should be encouraged to receive adequate nutrition, which is best achieved through 
consumption of a healthy, balanced diet, and to refer to WHO guidance on healthy eating (41).
 • In areas where supplementation is indicated for vitamin A deficiency, it can be given daily or weekly. 
Existing WHO guidance suggests a dose of up to 10 000 IU vitamin A per day, or a weekly dose of up to 
25 000 IU (60).
 • A single dose of a vitamin A supplement greater than 25 000 IU is not recommended as its safety 
is uncertain. Furthermore, a single dose of a vitamin A supplement greater than 25 000 IU might be 
teratogenic if consumed between day 15 and day 60 from conception (60).
 • There is no demonstrated benefit from taking vitamin A supplements in populations where habitual daily 
vitamin A intakes exceed 8000 IU or 2400 µg, and the potential risk of adverse events increases with 
higher intakes (above 10 000 IU) if supplements are routinely taken by people in these populations (62).
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of vitamin A supplements compared with 
no vitamin A supplements (EB Table A.4)
 The evidence was derived from a Cochrane 
systematic review of 19 trials of vitamin A (with 
or without other supplements) compared with 
no vitamin A (or placebo, or other supplements) 
involving over 310 000 women (63). All but one trial 
(conducted in the United Kingdom) were conducted 
in LMICs, including Bangladesh, China, Ghana, 
India, Indonesia, Malawi, Nepal, South Africa and 
the United Republic of Tanzania. Most trials were 
conducted in vitamin A deficient populations, with 
one study including only women living with HIV. Trials 
varied considerably in design, including in the dose 
and timing of the intervention. Ten trials contributed 
data to the comparison of vitamin A alone versus 
placebo or no treatment.
 Maternal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence shows that vitamin A 
supplementation in vitamin A deficient populations 
during pregnancy probably reduces maternal anaemia 
(3 trials, 15 649 women; RR: 0.64, 95% CI: 0.43
0.94), but that it probably has little or no effect on 
maternal mortality (4 trials, 101 574 women; RR: 0.88, 
95% CI: 0.65–1.20). Low-certainty evidence on a 
composite outcome for maternal infection (including 
fever for more than one week at one week postnatally, 
puerperal fever greater than 38°C, subclinical mastitis 
and/or bacterial vaginosis) suggests that vitamin A 
supplementation may reduce maternal infection 
(5 trials, 17 313 women; average RR: 0.45, 95% CI: 
0.2–0.99). Side-effects and other maternal ANC 
guideline outcomes were not reported in the trials.
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 High-certainly evidence shows that vitamin A 
supplementation makes little or no difference to 
perinatal mortality (76 176 women; RR: 1.01, 95% 
CI: 0.95–1.07), neonatal mortality (3 trials, 89 556 
neonates; RR: 0.97, 95% CI: 0.90–1.05) or stillbirths 
(2 trials, 122 850 neonates; RR: 1.04, 95% CI: 
0.98–1.10). Moderate-certainty evidence indicates 
that vitamin A supplementation probably has little 
or no effect on low birth weight (< 2500 g) (4 trials, 
14 599 neonates; RR: 0. 1.02, 95% CI: 0.89–1.16), and 
low-certainty evidence suggests that it may have little 
or no effect on preterm birth (5 trials, 40 137 women; 
RR: 0.98, 95% CI: 0.94–1.01). Neonatal infections and 
congenital anomalies were not reported in the trials.
 Additional considerations
 n
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 30
 n Moderate-certainty evidence shows that 
vitamin A supplementation reduces night 
blindness in pregnant women living in areas 
with a high prevalence of this condition (2 trials, 
approximately 100 000 women; RR: 0.79, 95% CI: 
0.64–0.98).
 n
 n Miscarriage and teratogenicity have been 
associated with high vitamin A intake within 60 
days of conception; however, a WHO expert group 
consultation in 1998 concluded that daily doses of 
up to 3000 µg per day after day 60 are probably 
safe, especially in areas where vitamin A deficiency 
is common (62).
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: 
Background (p. 15).
 Resources
 Vitamin A supplements are relatively inexpensive 
at approximately US$ 0.30 per woman per month 
(10 000 IU per day or 25 000 IU per week) (27). 
Vitamin A can be given as a daily or weekly 
supplement.
 Equity
 Effective nutritional interventions in disadvantaged 
populations could help to address health inequalities 
by improving nutritional status and promoting good 
maternal health.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence suggests that women in a 
variety of settings tend to view ANC as a source 
of knowledge and information and that they 
generally appreciate any advice (including dietary 
or nutritional) that may lead to a healthy baby and a 
positive pregnancy experience (high confidence in the 
evidence) (22).
 Feasibility
 Qualitative evidence shows that where there are 
additional costs associated with supplements 
(high confidence in the evidence) or where the 
recommended intervention is unavailable because 
of resource constraints (low confidence in the 
evidence), women may be less likely to engage with 
ANC (45).
A.5: Zinc supplements
 RECOMMENDATION A.5: Zinc supplementation for pregnant women is only recommended in 
the context of rigorous research. (Context-specific recommendation – research)
 Remarks
 • Many of the included studies were at risk of bias, which influenced the certainty of the review evidence on 
the effects of zinc supplementation.
 • The low-certainty evidence that zinc supplementation may reduce preterm birth warrants further 
investigation, as do the other outcomes for which the evidence is very uncertain (e.g. perinatal mortality, 
neonatal sepsis), particularly in zinc-deficient populations with no food fortification strategy in place. 
Further research should aim to clarify to what extent zinc supplementation competes with iron and/or 
calcium antenatal supplements for absorption. The GDG considered that food fortification may be a more 
cost–effective strategy and that more evidence is needed on the cost–effectiveness of food fortification 
strategies.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of zinc supplements compared with no 
zinc supplements (EB Table A.5)
 The evidence was derived from a Cochrane review 
that included 21 trials involving more than 17 000 
women (64). Most studies were conducted in 
LMICs, including Bangladesh, Chile, China, Egypt, 
Ghana, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Nepal, 
Pakistan, Peru and South Africa. Six trials were 
conducted in Denmark, the United Kingdom and 
the USA. Daily zinc supplementation was compared 
with no intervention or placebo. There was a wide 
variation among trials in terms of trial size (range: 
56–4926 women), zinc dosage (range: 5–90 mg per 
day), nutritional and zinc status at trial entry, initiation 
and duration of supplementation (starting before 
conception in one trial, first or second trimester in the 
majority, or after 26 weeks of gestation in two trials, 
until delivery), and compliance with treatment.
 Maternal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that zinc 
supplementation probably makes little or no 
difference to the risk of any maternal infections 
(3 trials, 1185 women; RR: 1.06; 95% CI: 0.74–1.53). 
The evidence on caesarean section, pre-eclampsia 
and side-effects (maternal taste and smell 
dysfunction) is of very low certainty, and the review 
did not include anaemia, maternal mortality or 
maternal satisfaction as review outcomes.
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that zinc 
supplementation probably makes little or no 
difference to the risk of having SGA (8 trials, 4252 
newborns; RR: 1.02; 95% CI: 0.94–1.11) or low-birth
weight neonates (14 trials, 5643 neonates; RR: 0.93, 
95% CI: 0.78–1.12). However, low-certainty evidence 
suggests that zinc supplementation may reduce 
preterm birth (16 trials, 7637 women; RR: 0.86, 95% 
CI: 0.76–0.97), particularly in women with presumed 
low zinc intake or poor nutrition (14 trials, 7099 
women; RR: 0.87, 95% CI: 0.77–0.98).
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that zinc sup ple
ment  ation may have little or no effect on congenital 
anomalies (6 trials, 1240 newborns; RR: 0.67, 95% CI: 
0.33–1.34) and macrosomia (defined in the review as 
“high birth weight”; 5 trials, 2837 neonates; RR: 1.00, 
95% CI: 0.84–1.18). Evidence on perinatal mortality 
and neonatal sepsis is of very low certainty.
 Additional considerations
 n
 n The trials were clinically heterogeneous, therefore 
it is unclear what dose and timing of zinc 
supplementation, if any, might lead to a possible 
reduction in preterm birth.
 n
 n There is little or no evidence on side-effects of 
zinc supplementation. In addition, it is unclear to 
what extent zinc might compete with iron and/or 
calcium for absorption. Maternal anaemia was not 
evaluated in the review.
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: 
Background (p. 15).
 Resources
 Zinc costs approximately US$ 1.30 for 100 tablets of 
20 mg (i.e. less than US$ 3.00 for a 6-month supply 
based on a daily dose of 20 mg) (27).
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
31
Equity
 Effective interventions to improve maternal nutrition 
in disadvantaged populations could help to address 
health inequalities. A WHO report shows that 
inequalities in neonatal, infant and child mortality, 
as well as stunting prevalence, can be demonstrated 
according to economic status, education and place of 
residence in LMICs. The prevalence of stunting may 
be a good indicator of zinc deficiency in LMICs (39).
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence suggests that women in a 
variety of settings tend to view ANC as a source 
of knowledge and information and they generally 
appreciate any professional advice (including dietary 
or nutritional) that may lead to a healthy baby and a 
positive pregnancy experience (high confidence in the 
evidence) (22).
 Feasibility
 It may be more feasible to fortify food with zinc 
rather than to provide zinc as a single supplement, 
particularly in settings with a high prevalence of 
stunting in children.
 A.6: Multiple micronutrient (MMN) supplements
 RECOMMENDATION A.6: Multiple micronutrient supplementation is not recommended for 
pregnant women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes. (Not recommended)
 Remarks
 • There is some evidence of additional benefit of MMN supplements containing 13–15 different 
micronutrients (including iron and folic acid) over iron and folic acid supplements alone, but there is 
also some evidence of risk, and some important gaps in the evidence. Although the GDG agreed that 
overall there was insufficient evidence to warrant a recommendation, the group agreed that policy
makers in populations with a high prevalence of nutritional deficiencies might consider the benefits of 
MMN supplements on maternal health to outweigh the disadvantages, and may choose to give MMN 
supplements that include iron and folic acid.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 32
 • More research is needed to determine which micronutrients improve maternal and perinatal outcomes, 
and how these can be optimally combined into a single supplement.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of MMN supplements (with 13–15 
different MMNs) compared with iron and folic 
acid supplements (EB Table A.6)
 The evidence was derived from a Cochrane review 
that included 17 trials involving 137 791 women 
(65); however, only 14 trials contributed data to 
this comparison. These 14 trials were all conducted 
in LMICs: Bangladesh (2), Burkina Faso (1), China 
(2), Guinea-Bissau (1), Indonesia (2), Mexico (1), 
Nepal (2), Niger (1), Pakistan (1) and Zimbabwe 
(1). The trials compared supplements containing 
13–15 micronutrients (including iron and folic acid) 
with iron and folic acid supplements only, except 
for one trial in which the control arm comprised 
iron only. Nine trials evaluated supplements with 
15 micronutrients, including vitamin A, B1, B2, B6, 
B12, C, D and E, copper, folic acid, iodine, iron, niacin, 
selenium and zinc, with exactly the same dosages as 
the UN international MMN preparation (UNIMMAP) 
(66). Evidence from these UNIMMAP trials was 
synthesized together with trials of 13 and 14 MMN 
supplements, and in separate subgroup analyses 
using the random effects method. Subgroup analyses 
were performed according to the dose of iron (60 mg 
or 30 mg) used in the control arm. Analyses can be 
found in the Web supplement (EB Table A.6).
 Maternal outcomes
 High-certainty evidence shows that MMN 
supplementation has a similar effect to iron and folic 
acid supplements only (standard care) on maternal 
anaemia (5 trials; RR: 0.98, 95% CI: 0.85–1.13). 
Compared to iron and folic acid only, moderate
certainty evidence indicates that MMN supplements 
probably make little or no difference to caesarean 
section rates (4 trials; RR: 1.03, 95% CI: 0.75–1.43) 
and low-certainty evidence suggests that they may 
have little or no effect on maternal mortality (3 trials; 
RR: 0.97, 95% CI: 0.63–1.48). There was no evidence 
relating to maternal satisfaction or side-effects.
Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Resources
 High-certainty evidence shows that MMN 
supplementation reduces the risk of having a low
birth-weight neonate compared with iron and folic 
acid supplements only (14 trials; RR: 0.88, 95% 
CI: 0.85–0.91), but moderate-certainty evidence 
indicates that it probably makes little or no difference 
to the risk of having an SGA neonate (13 trials; RR: 
0.98, 95% CI: 0.96–1.00). High-certainty evidence 
shows that MMN supplements make little or no 
difference to preterm birth rates (14 trials; RR: 0.95, 
95% CI: 0.88–1.03). Moderate-certainty evidence 
shows that MMN supplements probably make little 
or no difference to perinatal mortality (11 trials; RR: 
1.00, 95% CI: 0.85–1.19), neonatal mortality (11 
trials; RR: 0.99, 95% CI: 0.90–1.08) or stillbirths (14 
trials; RR: 0.97, 95% CI: 0.86–1.09). The evidence 
on congenital anomalies is of low certainty and 
inconclusive (1 trial, 1200 women; RR: 0.99, 95% CI: 
0.14–7.00).
 High-certainty evidence from analyses restricted 
to trials of UNIMMAP only are consistent with the 
overall findings, with the exception that it shows that 
UNIMMAP reduces the risk of having an SGA neonate 
compared with iron and folic acid supplements only 
(8 trials; RR: 0.85, 95% CI: 0.77–0.94).
 Subgroup analyses according to the iron dose in 
the control group are generally consistent with the 
overall findings. However, for the subgroup of studies 
that compared MMN supplements to 60 mg iron 
and 400 µg folic acid, a harmful effect of MMNs on 
neonatal mortality cannot be excluded (6 trials; RR: 
1.22, 95% CI: 0.95–1.57).
 Additional considerations
 n
 n A separate review of the effects of MMN 
supplementation during pregnancy on child 
health benefits pooled data from nine of the trials 
included in the Cochrane review and found no 
evidence of beneficial effects on child mortality, 
growth or cognitive function (67).
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: 
Background (p. 15).
 UNIMMAP supplements cost about US$ 3 per 
woman per pregnancy, whereas iron and folic acid 
supplementation costs less than US$ 1 (27).
 Equity
 Effective interventions to improve maternal nutrition 
in disadvantaged populations could help to address 
maternal and neonatal health inequalities by 
improving maternal health and preventing illness 
related to nutritional deficiencies. However, the cost 
difference between MMNs and iron and folic acid 
supplementation may have an impact on affordability 
for disadvantaged populations, especially those 
in remote and rural areas, because they are often 
expected to pay for visits and supplements in addition 
to bearing greater transport costs due to the greater 
distance to travel to ANC services (68).
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence suggests that women in a 
variety of settings tend to view ANC as a source 
of knowledge and information and that they 
generally appreciate any advice (including dietary 
or nutritional) that may lead to a healthy baby and 
a positive pregnancy experience (high confidence 
in the evidence) (22). However, it has been noted 
that the lack of appropriate training on MMN 
supplementation has been reported by health-care 
providers as a major gap (68).
 Feasibility
 From the demand side, MMN supplementation 
should be as feasible as iron and folic acid 
supplementation if supplements are free and 
available, and it will face the same challenges in terms 
of compliance. However, on the supply side, there 
may be several barriers to overcome, such as changes 
in regulatory norms and policies (e.g. tariffs, labelling, 
imports, government oversight, etc.), ensuring 
sustainable MMN production (local or imported), 
product availability and quality. Great variability in 
feasibility across countries and within them would be 
expected (68).
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
33
A.7: Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) supplements
 RECOMMENDATION A.7: Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) supplementation is not recommended for 
pregnant women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes. (Not recommended)
 Remarks
 • Pregnant women should be encouraged to receive adequate nutrition, which is best achieved through 
consumption of a healthy, balanced diet, and to refer to guidelines on healthy eating (41).
 • The GDG agreed that there is insufficient evidence on the benefits and harms, if any, of routine vitamin B6 
supplementation in pregnancy. However, research on the effects of routine vitamin B6 supplementation 
for pregnant women on maternal and perinatal outcomes is not considered a research priority.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of vitamin B6 supplements compared 
with no vitamin B6 supplements (EB Table A.7)
 The evidence was derived from a Cochrane review 
that included four trials involving approximately 
1646 pregnant women (69). Studies were conducted 
in HICs between 1960 and 1984. Vitamin B6 
(pyridoxine) given intramuscularly as a single dose 
(100 mg) or orally as capsules or lozenges (2.6 mg 
to 20 mg per day) was compared with placebo or no 
treatment. Only two out of four studies contributed 
data to this comparison.
 Maternal outcomes
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 34
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that oral pyridoxine 
supplements may have little or no effect on pre
eclampsia (2 trials, 1197 women; RR: 1.71, 95% CI: 
0.85–3.45). No other maternal outcomes relevant to 
the ANC guideline were reported in the review.
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Trials contributed no data on low birth weight, 
preterm birth or other ANC guideline outcomes. 
Mean birth weight was evaluated in one small trial 
but the evidence is very uncertain. There was no 
evidence on congenital anomalies.
 Additional considerations
 n
 n Moderate-certainty evidence shows that vitamin 
B6 probably provides some relief for nausea 
during pregnancy (see evidence summary for 
Recommendation D.1, in section D: Interventions 
for common physiological symptoms).
 n
 n Vitamin B6 deficiency alone is uncommon; it 
mostly occurs in combination with deficiencies of 
other B vitamins (70).
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: 
Background (p. 15).
 Resources
 As a single supplement, vitamin B6 (pyridoxine 
hydrochloride tablets) can cost about US$ 2.50 for 
90 × 10 mg tablets (71).
 Equity
 Effective interventions to improve maternal nutrition 
in disadvantaged populations could help to address 
health inequalities.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence suggests that women in a 
variety of settings tend to view ANC as a source of 
knowledge and information and that they generally 
appreciate any professional advice (including dietary 
or nutritional) that may lead to a healthy baby and a 
positive pregnancy experience (high confidence in the 
evidence) (22).
 Feasibility
 Qualitative evidence shows that where there are 
additional costs associated with supplements 
(high confidence in the evidence) or where the 
recommended intervention is unavailable because 
of resource constraints (low confidence in the 
evidence), women may be less likely to engage with 
ANC services (45).
A.8: Vitamin E and C supplements
 RECOMMENDATION A.8: Vitamin E and C supplementation is not recommended for pregnant 
women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes. (Not recommended)
 Remarks
 • The GDG noted that vitamin E and C combined supplements were evaluated mainly in the context of 
preventing pre-eclampsia. Vitamin C is important for improving the bioavailability of oral iron, but this 
was not considered within the context of the Cochrane reviews. In addition, low-certainty evidence on 
vitamin C alone suggests that it may prevent prelabour rupture of membranes (PROM). Therefore, the 
GDG agreed that future research should consider vitamin C supplements separately from vitamin E and C 
supplements.
 • Pregnant women should be encouraged to receive adequate nutrition, which is best achieved through 
consumption of a healthy, balanced diet, and to refer to guidelines on healthy eating (41). It is relatively 
easy to consume sufficient quantities of vitamin C from food sources.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of vitamin E and C supplements 
compared with no vitamin E and C supplements 
(EB Table A.8)
 The evidence was derived from two Cochrane 
systematic reviews that included 17 trials conducted in 
low-, middle- and high-income countries contributed 
data (72, 73). The trials assessed vitamin E plus 
vitamin C combined supplements compared with 
placebo or no vitamin E and C supplements. The most 
commonly used dose of vitamin E was 400 IU daily 
(15 trials) and vitamin C was 1000 mg daily (13 trials). 
The primary outcome of 14 trials was pre-eclampsia 
and nine of the trials recruited women at “high” or 
“increased” risk of pre-eclampsia. Most of the trials 
commenced supplementation in the second trimester.
 Maternal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence shows that vitamin E 
and C combined supplements probably have little or 
no effect on the risk of developing pre-eclampsia (14 
studies, 20 878 women; RR: 0.91 95% CI: 0.79–1.06) 
and eclampsia (8 trials, 19 471 women; RR: 1.67, 95% 
CI: 0.82–3.41). Moderate-certainty evidence also 
shows that vitamin E and C supplements probably 
have little or no effect on maternal mortality (7 trials, 
17 120 women; RR: 0.60, 95% CI: 0.14–2.51) and 
caesarean section (6 trials, 15 297 women; RR: 1.02, 
95% CI: 0.97–1.07).
 Side-effects: High-certainty evidence shows that 
vitamin E and C supplementation is associated with 
an increased risk of abdominal pain during pregnancy 
(1 trial, 1877 women; RR: 1.66, 95% CI: 1.16–2.37; 
absolute effect of 32 more per 1000 women).
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 High-certainty evidence indicates that vitamin E and 
C supplementation does not have an important effect 
on SGA (11 trials, 20 202 women; RR: 0.98, 95% CI: 
0.91–1.06). Moderate-certainty evidence shows that 
vitamin E and C supplements probably have little or 
no effect on preterm birth (11 trials, 20 565 neonates; 
RR: 0.98, 95% CI: 0.88–1.09), neonatal infections 
(5 trials, 13 324 neonates; RR: 1.10, 95% CI: 0.73–1.67) 
and congenital anomalies (4 trials, 5511 neonates;  
RR: 1.16, 95% CI: 0.83–1.63).
 Additional considerations
 n
 n The high-certainty evidence on abdominal pain is 
derived from a large, well designed trial in which 
abdominal pain occurred in 7.9% of women in the 
vitamin E and C supplement group and 4.8% of 
women in the placebo group.
 n
 n Despite the certainty of these effects of vitamin E 
and C supplementation, the biological explanations 
for these adverse effects are not established.
 n
 n Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that 
vitamin E and C supplements probably reduce the 
risk of placental abruption (7 trials, 14 922 women; 
RR: 0.64, 95% CI: 0.44–0.93; absolute effect of 3 
fewer abruptions per 1000) but make little or no 
difference to the risk of antepartum haemorrhage 
from any cause (2 trials, 12 256 women; RR: 1.25, 
95% CI: 0.85–1.82).
 n
 n High-certainty evidence shows vitamin E and 
C supplementation increases PROM at term 
(37 weeks of gestation or more) (2 trials, 2504 
women; RR: 1.77, 95% CI: 1.37–2.28; absolute effect 
of 52 more cases of PROM per 1000).
 n
 n The trial contributing the most data on PROM was 
stopped early, based on their PROM data, when 
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
35
only a quarter of the planned sample (10 000 
women) had been accrued.
 n
 n Low- to moderate-certainty evidence on vitamin 
C only suggests that vitamin C alone (in doses 
ranging from 100 mg to 1000 mg) may reduce 
preterm PROM (5 studies, 1282 women; RR: 0.66, 
95% CI: 0.48–0.91) and term PROM (1 study, 170 
women; RR: 0.55, 95% CI: 0.32–0.94).
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: 
Background (p. 15).
 Resources
 Vitamin E (tocopherol) 400 IU daily can cost about 
US$ 8 for a month’s supply. Costs of vitamin C vary 
widely; chewable vitamin C tablets (1000 mg) can 
cost about US$ 3 for a month’s supply (74).
 Equity
 Effective interventions to reduce pre-eclampsia 
could help to address health inequalities because 
A.9: Vitamin D supplements
 mortality from pre-eclampsia mainly occurs among 
disadvantaged populations.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence suggests that women in a 
variety of settings tend to view ANC as a source of 
knowledge and information and that they generally 
appreciate any professional advice (including dietary 
or nutritional) that may lead to a healthy baby and a 
positive pregnancy experience (high confidence in the 
evidence) (22).
 Feasibility
 Qualitative evidence shows that where there are 
additional costs associated with supplements 
(high confidence in the evidence) or where the 
recommended intervention is unavailable because 
of resource constraints (low confidence in the 
evidence), women may be less likely to engage with 
ANC services (45).
 RECOMMENDATION A.9: Vitamin D supplementation is not recommended for pregnant women 
to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes. (Not recommended)
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 36
 Remarks
 • This recommendation supersedes the previous WHO recommendation found in the 2012 Guideline: 
vitamin D supplementation in pregnant women (75).
 • Pregnant women should be advised that sunlight is the most important source of vitamin D. The amount 
of time needed in the sun is not known and depends on many variables, such as the amount of skin 
exposed, the time of day, latitude and season, skin pigmentation (darker skin pigments synthesize less 
vitamin D than lighter pigments) and sunscreen use (75). 
• Pregnant women should be encouraged to receive adequate nutrition, which is best achieved through 
consumption of a healthy, balanced diet, and to refer to guidelines on healthy eating (41).
 • For pregnant women with documented vitamin D deficiency, vitamin D supplements may be given at the 
current recommended nutrient intake (RNI) of 200 IU (5 µg) per day.
 • According to the Cochrane review, there are 23 ongoing or unpublished studies on vitamin D 
supplementation in pregnancy (76). Evidence from these trials should help to clarify the current 
uncertainties regarding vitamin D effects, particularly the effect on preterm birth, and any other 
associated benefits or harms of vitamin D when combined with other vitamins and minerals, particularly 
calcium.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 The evidence was derived from a Cochrane 
systematic review that included 15 trials assessing 
2833 women (76). Nine trials were conducted in 
LMICs (Bangladesh, Brazil, China, India and the 
Islamic Republic of Iran) and six were conducted in 
HICs (France, New Zealand, Russia and the United 
Kingdom). Sample sizes ranged from 40 to 400 
women. Nine trials compared the effects of vitamin D 
alone versus placebo or no supplementation, and six 
trials compared the effects of vitamin D plus calcium 
versus placebo or no supplementation. The dose and 
regimen of vitamin D varied widely among the trials.
 a) Effects of vitamin D supplements alone versus 
placebo or no supplement (EB Table A.9)
 Nine trials contributed data to this comparison. Six 
trials evaluated daily vitamin D with daily doses 
ranging from 400 IU to 2000 IU. Two trials evaluated 
a single dose of 200 000 IU given at about 28 
weeks of gestation, one trial evaluated a weekly 
dose of 35 000 IU during the third trimester, and one 
trial administered 1–4 vitamin D doses (60 000
480 000 IU in total) depending on the participants’ 
baseline serum 25-hydroxy-vitamin D levels.
 Maternal outcomes
 The evidence on pre-eclampsia, GDM, maternal 
mortality, caesarean section and side-effects is very 
uncertain (i.e. all findings were assessed as very low
certainty evidence).
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that vitamin D 
supplementation may reduce low-birth-weight 
neonates (3 trials, 493 women; RR: 0.40, 95% 
CI: 0.24–0.67) and preterm birth (< 37 weeks of 
gestation) (3 trials, 477 women; RR: 0.36, 95% 
CI: 0.14–0.93), but may have little or no effect on 
neonatal deaths (2 trials, 282 women, RR: 0.27; 95% 
CI: 0.04–1.67) and stillbirths (3 trials, 540 women; 
RR: 0.35, 95% CI: 0.06–1.99).
 b) Effects of vitamin D plus calcium supplements 
versus placebo or no supplement (EB Table A.9)
 Six trials contributed data to this comparison. Vitamin 
D doses ranged from 200 IU to 1250 IU daily and 
calcium doses ranged from 375 mg to 1250 mg daily.
 Maternal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence shows that vitamin 
D plus calcium probably reduces pre-eclampsia 
(3 trials, 798 women; RR: 0.51; 95% CI: 0.32–0.80), 
but low-certainty evidence suggest that it may have 
little or no effect on GDM (1 trial, 54 women, 1 event; 
RR: 0.43, 95% CI: 0.05–3.45).
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that vitamin 
D plus calcium probably increases preterm birth 
(< 37 weeks of gestation) (3 trials, 798 women; 
RR: 1.57, 95% CI: 1.02–2.43). Low-certainty evidence 
suggests that vitamin D plus calcium has little or no 
effect on neonatal mortality (1 trial, 660 women; RR: 
0.20, 95% CI: 0.01–4.14).
 Additional considerations
 n
 n Due to the limited evidence currently available to 
directly assess the benefits and harms of the use of 
vitamin D supplementation alone in pregnancy for 
improving maternal and infant health outcomes, 
the use of this intervention during pregnancy as 
part of routine ANC is not recommended (75).
 n
 n The moderate-certainty evidence showing that 
adding vitamin D to calcium supplementation 
probably increases preterm birth is of concern and 
this potential harm needs further investigation.
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: 
Background (p. 15).
 Resources
 Vitamin D supplements can cost from US$ 2 per 
month, depending on the dose prescribed (74).
 Equity
 Effective interventions to improve maternal nutrition 
in disadvantaged populations could help to address 
health inequalities.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence suggests that women in a 
variety of settings tend to view ANC as a source of 
knowledge and information and that they generally 
appreciate any professional advice (including dietary 
or nutritional) that may lead to a healthy baby and a 
positive pregnancy experience (high confidence in the 
evidence) (22).
 Feasibility
 Qualitative evidence shows that where there are 
additional costs associated with supplements 
(high confidence in the evidence) or where the 
recommended intervention is unavailable because 
of resource constraints (low confidence in the 
evidence), women may be less likely to engage with 
ANC services (45).
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
37
A.10: Restricting caffeine intake
 RECOMMENDATION A.10: For pregnant women with high daily caffeine intake (more than 
300 mg per day),a lowering daily caffeine intake during pregnancy is recommended to reduce the 
risk of pregnancy loss and low-birth-weight neonates. (Context-specific recommendation)
 Remarks
 • Pregnant women should be informed that a high daily caffeine intake (> 300 mg per day) is probably 
associated with a higher risk of pregnancy loss and low birth weight.
 • Caffeine is a stimulant found in tea, coffee, soft-drinks, chocolate, kola nuts and some over-the-counter 
medicines. Coffee is probably the most common source of high caffeine intake. A cup of instant coffee 
can contain about 60 mg of caffeine; however, some commercially brewed coffee brands contain more 
than 150 mg of caffeine per serving.
 • Caffeine-containing teas (black tea and green tea) and soft drinks (colas and iced tea) usually contain 
less than 50 mg per 250 mL serving.
 a This includes any product, beverage or food containing caffeine (i.e. brewed coffee, tea, cola-type soft drinks, caffeinated energy drinks, chocolate, caffeine 
tablets).
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 a) Effects of decaffeinated coffee versus 
caffeinated coffee (RCT evidence) (EB 
Table A.10a)
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 38
 Some evidence on the effects of caffeine intake 
was derived from a Cochrane review that included 
two RCTs (40). Only one of the trials, conducted in 
Denmark, contributed evidence. In this trial, 1207 
pregnant women drinking more than three cups of 
coffee a day were randomized to receive instant 
decaffeinated coffee (intervention group) versus 
instant caffeinated coffee (control group) in order 
to assess the effect of caffeine reduction during 
pregnancy. In this trial, a cup of caffeinated coffee 
was estimated to contain 65 mg caffeine. Other 
sources of caffeine, such as cola, tea and chocolate 
were not restricted. Mean daily caffeine intake in 
the decaffeinated coffee group was 117 mg per day 
(interquartile range [IQR]: 56–228 mg) compared 
with 317 mg per day (IQR: 229–461 mg) in the 
caffeinated coffee group.
 Maternal outcomes
 None of the maternal outcomes addressed in the 
ANC guideline were reported in the review.
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence from one trial shows that 
restricting caffeine intake (replacing caffeinated 
coffee with decaffeinated coffee) may have little or 
no effect on SGA (1150 neonates; RR: 0.97, 95% CI: 
0.57–1.64), mean birth weight (1197 neonates; MD: 
20.00, 95% CI: –48.68 to 88.68) and preterm birth 
(1153 neonates; RR: 0.81, 95% CI: 0.48–1.37).
 No data were available on congenital anomalies or 
perinatal mortality.
 b) Effects of high caffeine intake versus 
moderate, low or no caffeine intake (non
randomized study evidence) (EB Table A.10b)
 The GDG considered the evidence from RCTs to be 
insufficient to make a recommendation on caffeine 
restriction and additional evidence from reviews of 
non-randomized studies (NRSs) was thus evaluated. 
Two NRS reviews asked the question, “Is there an 
association between maternal caffeine intake and the 
risk of low birth weight?” (77, 78), and two reviews 
asked the question “Is there an association between 
maternal caffeine intake and the risk of pregnancy 
loss?” (79, 80). In these reviews, low caffeine intake 
was defined as less than 150 mg caffeine per day, 
and high caffeine intake was defined as more than 
300 mg or more than 350 mg per day. All four reviews 
adjusted data for smoking and other variables, and 
performed dose–response meta-analyses.
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes: low birth weight
 Moderate-certainty evidence from one review shows 
that high caffeine intake (more than 300 mg) is 
probably associated with a greater risk of low birth 
weight than low or no caffeine intake (12 studies; 
odds ratio [OR]: 1.38, 95% CI: 1.10–1.73) (78). Very 
low- to moderate-certainty evidence from the other 
review was stratified according to dose and shows 
that very low caffeine intake may be associated with 
fewer low-birth-weight neonates than low (5 studies; 
RR: 1.13, 95% CI: 1.06–1.21), moderate (7 studies; RR: 
1.38, 95% CI: 1.18–1.62) or high caffeine intake (8 
studies; RR: 1.60, 95% CI: 1.24–2.08) (77).
Fetal and neonatal outcomes: stillbirths
 Equity
 The reviews reported “pregnancy loss”, a composite 
outcome comprising stillbirths and miscarriages. 
Moderate-certainty evidence from one review (80) 
shows that any caffeine intake probably increases 
pregnancy loss compared with controls (no 
exposure) (18 studies; OR: 1.32, 95% CI: 1.24–1.40). 
However, pregnancy loss is probably more common 
among pregnant women with moderate caffeine 
intake (18 studies; OR: 1.28, 95% CI: 1.16–1.42) and 
high caffeine intake (17 studies, OR: 1.60, 1.46–1.76), 
but not more common with low caffeine intake 
(13 studies; OR: 1.04, 95% CI: 0.94–1.15) compared 
with controls. This NRS evidence was upgraded to 
“moderate-certainty” due to the presence of a dose
response relationship. A dose–response relationship 
was also observed in the other review but the 
evidence was less certain (79).
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.A: 
Background (p. 15).
 Resources
 Communicating with pregnant women about 
the probable risks of high caffeine intake during 
pregnancy is a relatively low-cost intervention.
 Interventions to restrict coffee intake during 
pregnancy are unlikely to impact health inequalities 
as coffee consumption tends to be associated 
with affluence. However, it is unclear whether the 
consumption of caffeine through other sources might 
be a problem for pregnant women in disadvantaged 
populations.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence indicates that women in a 
variety of settings generally appreciate any advice 
(including dietary or nutritional) that may lead to a 
healthy baby and a positive pregnancy experience 
(high confidence in the evidence) (22). Evidence 
on health-care providers’ views on ANC suggests 
that they may be keen to offer general health-care 
advice and specific pregnancy-related information 
(low confidence in the evidence) but they sometimes 
feel they do not have the appropriate training and 
lack the resources and time to deliver the service in 
the informative, supportive and caring manner that 
women want (high confidence in the evidence) (45).
 Feasibility
 A lack of suitably trained staff to deliver health 
promotion interventions may limit implementation 
(high confidence in the evidence) (45).
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
39
B. Maternal and fetal assessment
 B.1: Maternal assessment
 Background
 Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy are important 
causes of maternal and perinatal morbidity and 
mortality, with approximately a quarter of maternal 
deaths and near misses estimated to be due to pre
eclampsia and eclampsia (9). Antenatal screening 
for pre-eclampsia is an essential part of good ANC. 
It is routinely performed by measuring maternal 
blood pressure and checking for proteinuria at each 
ANC contact and, upon detection of pre-eclampsia, 
specific management is required to prevent eclampsia 
and other poor maternal and perinatal outcomes 
(57). The GDG did not evaluate evidence or make a 
recommendation on this procedure, therefore, which 
it considers to be an essential component of Good 
Clinical Practice in ANC.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 40
 As part of the ANC guideline development, 
specifically in relation to maternal assessment, 
the GDG considered evidence and other relevant 
information on interventions to detect the following 
conditions in pregnancy:
 n
 n Anaemia: Defined as a blood haemoglobin (Hb) 
concentration below 110 g/L, anaemia is the 
world’s second leading cause of disability, and one 
of the most serious global public health problems, 
with the global prevalence of anaemia among 
pregnant women at about 38% (33). Clinical 
assessment (inspection of the conjunctiva for 
pallor) is a common method of detecting anaemia 
but has been shown to be quite inaccurate. 
In HICs, performing a full blood count, which 
quantifies the blood Hb level, is part of routine 
ANC (81). However, this and other available 
tests may be expensive, complex or impractical 
for use in rural or LMIC settings. A low-cost and 
reliable method of detecting anaemia is therefore 
needed for places with no or limited access 
to laboratory facilities. WHO developed the 
haemoglobin colour scale, a low-cost method that 
is performed by placing a drop of undiluted blood 
on specially made chromatography paper and 
matching it against a range of colours representing 
different Hb values in 20 g/L increments (82). 
With haemoglobinometer tests, undiluted blood 
is placed directly into a microcuvette, which 
is inserted into the haemoglobinometer (or 
photometer) to produce a reading (82).
 n
 n Asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB): ASB is a 
common urinary tract condition that is associated 
with an increased risk of urinary tract infections 
(cystitis and pyelonephritis) in pregnant women. 
Escherichia coli is associated with up to 80% 
of isolates; other pathogens include Klebsiella 
species, Proteus mirabilis and group B streptococcus 
(GBS) (83). Methods for diagnosing ASB include 
midstream urine culture (the gold standard), Gram 
stain and urine dipstick tests. A urine culture can 
take up to seven days to get a result, with the 
threshold for diagnosis usually defined as the 
presence of 105 colony-forming units (cfu)/mL of 
a single organism (84). The Gram stain test uses 
colour stains (crystal violet and safrinin O) to 
exaggerate and distinguish between Gram-positive 
(purple) and Gram-negative (red) organisms on a 
prepared glass slide. Urine dipsticks test for nitrites, 
which are not found in normal urine, and leucocytes, 
which are identified by a reaction with leucocyte 
esterase, to identify the presence of bacteria and 
pus in the urine, respectively. ASB is associated 
with an increased risk of preterm birth; once 
detected it is, therefore, usually actively managed 
with antibiotics (see also Recommendation C.1, in 
section C: Preventive measures).
 n
 n Intimate partner violence (IPV): IPV, defined as 
any behaviour within an intimate relationship that 
causes physical, psychological or sexual harm to 
those in the relationship, is now recognized as a 
global public health issue. Worldwide, almost one 
third of all women who have been in a relationship 
have experienced physical and/or sexual violence 
by their intimate partner (85). Emotional abuse 
(being humiliated, insulted, intimidated and 
subjected to controlling behaviours such as not 
being permitted to see friends or family) also 
adversely impacts the health of individuals (85). 
IPV is associated with chronic problems in women, 
including poor reproductive health (e.g. a history of 
STIs including HIV, unintended pregnancy, abortion 
and/or miscarriage), depression, substance use 
and other mental health problems (85). During 
pregnancy, IPV is a potentially preventable risk 
factor for various adverse outcomes, including 
maternal and fetal death. Clinical enquiry about IPV 
aims to identify women who have experienced or 
are experiencing IPV, in order to offer interventions 
leading to improved outcomes. Some governments 
and professional organizations recommend 
screening all women for IPV rather than asking only 
women with symptoms (86).
 In addition to GDG recommendations on the 
above, recommendations on diagnosing gestational 
diabetes mellitus (GDM) and screening for tobacco 
smoking, alcohol and substance abuse, TB and HIV 
B.1.1: Anaemia
 Women’s values
 A scoping review of what women want from ANC 
and what outcomes they value informed the ANC 
guideline (13). Evidence showed that women from 
high-, medium- and low-resource settings valued 
having a positive pregnancy experience. Within the 
context of maternal and fetal assessment, women 
valued the opportunity to receive screening and 
tests to optimize their health and that of their baby 
as long as individual procedures were explained to 
them clearly and administered by knowledgeable, 
supportive and respectful health-care practitioners 
(high confidence in the evidence).
 infection have been integrated into this chapter from 
the respective existing WHO guidance on these 
conditions.
 RECOMMENDATION B.1.1: Full blood count testing is the recommended method for diagnosing 
anaemia during pregnancy. In settings where full blood count testing is not available, on
site haemoglobin testing with a haemoglobinometer is recommended over the use of the 
haemoglobin colour scale as the method for diagnosing anaemia in pregnancy.
 (Context-specific recommendation)
 Remarks
 • The GDG agreed that the high recurrent costs of Hb testing with haemoglobinometers might reduce the 
feasibility of this method in some low-resource settings, in which case the WHO haemoglobin colour 
scale method may be used.
 • Other low-technology on-site methods for detecting anaemia need development and/or investigation.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Test accuracy of on-site Hb testing with 
haemoglobinometer and haemoglobin colour 
scale (HCS) methods to detect anaemia (EB 
Table B.1.1)
 The evidence was derived from a test accuracy 
review conducted to support the ANC guideline 
(81). Only one study (671 women) contributed data 
(87). The study, conducted in Malawi, assessed 
the test accuracy of on-site Hb testing with a 
haemoglobinometer (HemoCue®) and the HCS 
method in comparison to a full blood count test 
performed by an electronic counter (Coulter counter), 
the reference standard. 
Moderate-certainty evidence shows that the 
sensitivity and specificity of the haemoglobinometer 
test in detecting anaemia (Hb < 110 g/L) are 
approximately 0.85 (95% CI: 0.79–0.90) and 
0.80 (95% CI: 0.76–0.83), respectively, while the 
sensitivity and specificity of the HCS method are 
lower at approximately 0.75 (95% CI: 0.71–0.80) and 
0.47 (95% CI: 0.41–0.53), respectively.
 For severe anaemia (defined in the study as 
Hb < 60 g/L), moderate-certainty evidence 
shows that the sensitivity and specificity of the 
haemoglobinometer test are approximately 0.83 
(95% CI: 0.44–0.97) and 0.99 (95% CI: 0.98–1.00), 
respectively, while for the HCS method they are 
approximately 0.50 (95% CI: 0.15–0.85) and 0.98 
(95% CI: 0.97–0.99), respectively.
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
41
Additional considerations
 Resources
 n
 n In absolute numbers, the data mean that in 
settings with an anaemia prevalence of 38%, the 
haemoglobinometer test will probably miss about 
57 anaemic women (95% CI: 38–80) out of every 
1000 women tested, whereas the HCS method 
will probably miss about 95 anaemic women (95% 
CI: 76–110) out of every 1000 women tested. For 
populations with a severe anaemia prevalence of 
5%, the haemoglobinometer test will probably 
miss about nine women with severe anaemia 
(95% CI: 2–27) out of every 1000 women tested, 
whereas the HCS method will probably miss about 
25 women with severe anaemia (95% CI: 3–43) 
out of every 1000 women tested.
 n
 n The main limitation of the evidence is the 
low number of women identified with severe 
anaemia, which affects the precision of the 
estimates. However, the evidence suggests that 
the haemoglobinometer test is probably more 
accurate than the HCS method. As there are no 
direct comparisons in test accuracy studies and, as 
confidence intervals for sensitivity and specificity of 
the two methods overlap, there is some uncertainty 
about the relative accuracy of these tests.
 n
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 42
 n The review also evaluated the test accuracy of 
clinical assessment (4 studies, 1853 women), 
giving a sensitivity for clinical assessment of 0.64 
(95% CI: 22–94) and a specificity of 0.63 (95% CI: 
23–91) for detecting anaemia (Hb < 110 g/L). Thus, 
the HCS method might be more sensitive but less 
specific than clinical assessment.
 n
 n In settings where iron supplementation is routinely 
used by pregnant women, the consequence of 
missing women with severe anaemia is more 
serious than that of missing women with mild or 
moderate anaemia, as women with severe anaemia 
usually require additional treatment. Therefore, 
the accuracy of on-site Hb tests to detect severe 
anaemia in pregnancy is probably more important 
than the ability to detect Hb below 110 g/L.
 n
 n A study of various Hb testing methods in Malawi 
found the haemoglobinometer method to be the 
most user-friendly method (82).
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.B.1: 
Maternal assessment: Background (p. 41).
 Any health-care provider can perform both the 
haemoglobinometer and HCS methods after 
minimal training. The haemoglobinometer and HCS 
methods have been estimated to cost approximately 
US$ 0.75 and US$ 0.12 per test, respectively (82). 
Both methods require needles for finger pricks, 
cotton balls, gloves and Sterets® skin cleansing 
swabs; however, the higher costs associated with 
haemoglobinometer tests are mainly due to supplies 
(cuvettes and controls), equipment costs and 
maintenance.
 Equity
 The highest prevalence of maternal anaemia occurs 
in Africa and South-East Asia, where parasitic 
infections are major contributory factors (33). 
Anaemia increases perinatal risks for mothers and 
newborns and contributes to preventable mortality. 
Accurate, low-cost, simple-to-use tests to detect 
anaemia might help to address health inequalities 
by improving the detection and subsequent 
management of women with anaemia, particularly 
severe anaemia, in low-resource settings.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence from a variety of settings 
indicates that women generally appreciate clinical 
tests that support their well-being during pregnancy 
(moderate confidence in the evidence) (22). 
However, evidence from LMICs indicates that where 
there are likely to be additional costs associated with 
tests, or where the recommended interventions are 
unavailable because of resource constraints, women 
may be less likely to engage with ANC services (high 
confidence in the evidence).
 Feasibility
 Qualitative evidence from providers in various LMICs 
indicates that a lack of resources, both in terms of the 
availability of the diagnostic equipment and potential 
treatments, as well as the lack of suitably trained staff 
to deliver the service, may limit implementation of 
recommended interventions (high confidence in the 
evidence) (45).
B.1.2: Asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB)
 RECOMMENDATION B.1.2: Midstream urine culture is the recommended method for diagnosing 
asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB) in pregnancy. In settings where urine culture is not available, 
on-site midstream urine Gram-staining is recommended over the use of dipstick tests as the 
method for diagnosing ASB in pregnancy. (Context-specific recommendation)
 Remarks
 • This recommendation should be considered alongside Recommendation C.1 on ASB treatment (see 
section C: Preventive measures).
 • The GDG agreed that the higher resource costs associated with Gram stain testing might reduce the 
feasibility of this method in low-resource settings, in which case, dipstick tests may be used.
 • The GDG agreed that ASB is a priority research topic, given its association with preterm birth and the 
uncertainty around urine testing and treatment in settings with different levels of ASB prevalence. 
Specifically, studies are needed that compare on-site testing and treatment versus testing plus 
confirmation of test with treatment on confirmatory culture, to explore health and other relevant 
outcomes, including acceptability, feasibility and antimicrobial resistance. In addition, better on-site tests 
need to be developed to improve accuracy and feasibility of testing and to reduce overtreatment of ASB. 
Research is also needed to determine the prevalence of ASB at which targeted testing and treatment 
rather than universal testing and treatment might be effective.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Test accuracy of on-site urine Gram staining and 
dipsticks to detect ASB (EB Table B.1.2)
 The evidence was derived from a test accuracy 
review of on-site urine tests conducted to support 
the ANC guideline (88). Four studies (1904 pregnant 
women) contributed data on urine Gram staining and 
eight studies (5690 pregnant women) contributed 
data on urine dipsticks. Most of the studies were 
conducted in LMICs. The average prevalence of ASB 
in the studies was 8%. A Gram stain was positive 
if one or more bacteria were detected per oil
immersed field, and a dipstick test was positive if it 
detected either nitrites or leucocytes. The reference 
standard used was urine culture with a threshold of 
105 cfu/mL.
 However, the certainty of the evidence on the 
accuracy of both Gram stain tests and dipstick tests 
is very low, with pooled sensitivity and specificity of 
the Gram stain test estimated at 0.86 (95% CI: 0.80
0.91) and 0.97 (95% CI: 0.93–0.99), respectively, and 
pooled sensitivity and specificity for urine dipsticks 
estimated at 0.73 (95% CI: 0.59–0.83) and 0.89 
(95% CI: 0.79–0.94), respectively. A positive nitrite 
test alone on dipsticks was found to be less sensitive 
but more specific than when urine leucocytes were 
also considered.
 Additional considerations
 n
 n A high level of accuracy in detecting ASB is 
important to avoid treating women unnecessarily, 
particularly in view of increasing antimicrobial 
resistance. Based on the uncertain evidence above, 
and assuming a prevalence of ASB of 9%, there 
would be 18 and 118 false-positive tests per 1000 
women tested with Gram stain and dipstick tests, 
respectively. This suggests that, in settings where 
pregnant women are treated for ASB, dipstick 
diagnosis of ASB might lead to many women 
receiving unnecessary treatment.
 n
 n Dipstick tests are multi-test strips that, in addition 
to testing for nitrites and leucocytes, may also 
include detection of urine protein and glucose. 
However, the accuracy of dipsticks to detect 
conditions associated with proteinuria (pre
eclampsia) and glycosuria (diabetes mellitus) is 
considered to be low.
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.B.1: 
Maternal assessment: Background (p. 41).
 Resources
 Dipsticks are relatively low cost compared with the 
Gram stain test, as the latter requires trained staff 
and laboratory equipment and supplies (microscope, 
glass slides, reagents, Bunsen burner or slide 
warmer). Gram stain tests take longer to perform and 
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
43
to produce results than urine dipstick tests (10–30 
minutes vs 60 seconds).
 Equity
 Preterm birth is the leading cause of neonatal death 
worldwide, with most deaths occurring in LMICs. 
Timely diagnosis and treatment of risk factors 
associated with preterm birth might therefore help to 
address health inequalities.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence from a range of settings 
suggests that women view ANC as a source of 
knowledge, information and clinical expertise and 
that they generally appreciate the tests and advice 
they are offered (high confidence in the evidence) 
(22). However, engagement with ANC services may 
be limited if tests and procedures are not explained 
properly or when women feel their beliefs and 
traditions are being overlooked or ignored by health
care professionals. In addition, if the Gram stain 
test is associated with long waiting times at ANC 
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 44
 or having to return for test results, this may be less 
acceptable to women, as it might have additional 
cost and convenience implications for them (high 
confidence in the evidence). Health professionals are 
likely to prefer the dipstick test as it is associated with 
less effort (no need to label samples for laboratory 
assessment, perform tests or schedule follow-up 
visits to provide the results) and might provide 
additional information pertaining to other conditions 
(pre-eclampsia and diabetes mellitus) (high 
confidence in the evidence).
 Feasibility
 Qualitative evidence indicates that, in some LMIC 
settings, the lack of diagnostic equipment at ANC 
facilities discourages women from attending, and 
that providers often do not have the diagnostic 
equipment, supplies or skills to perform tests (high 
confidence in the evidence) (45). Therefore, urine 
dipstick tests, which are cheaper and easy to perform, 
might be more feasible in low-resource settings.
B.1.3: Intimate partner violence (IPV)
 RECOMMENDATION B.1.3: Clinical enquiry about the possibility of intimate partner violence 
(IPV) should be strongly considered at antenatal care visits when assessing conditions that 
may be caused or complicated by IPV in order to improve clinical diagnosis and subsequent 
care, where there is the capacity to provide a supportive response (including referral 
where appropriate) and where the WHO minimum requirements are met.a (Context-specific 
recommendation)
 Remarks
 • This recommendation is consistent with the 2013 publication Responding to intimate partner violence and 
sexual violence against women: WHO clinical and policy guidelines (86). The evidence on clinical enquiry was 
indirect (strong recommendation) and the evidence on universal screening was judged as being of low to 
moderate quality (conditional recommendation).
 • “Universal screening” or “routine enquiry” (i.e. asking all women at all health-care encounters) about 
IPV is not recommended. However, the WHO guidelines identify ANC as a setting where routine enquiry 
could be implemented if providers are well trained on a first-line response and minimum requirements are 
met (86).
 • Examples of conditions during pregnancy that may be caused or complicated by IPV include (86):– traumatic injury, particularly if repeated and with vague or implausible explanations;– intrusive partner or husband present at consultations;– adverse reproductive outcomes, including multiple unintended pregnancies and/or terminations, delay 
in seeking ANC, adverse birth outcomes, repeated STIs;– unexplained or repeated genitourinary symptoms;– symptoms of depression and anxiety;– alcohol and other substance use;– self-harm, suicidality, symptoms of depression and anxiety.
 • The GDG agreed that, despite a paucity of evidence, it was important to make a recommendation due to 
the high prevalence and importance of IPV. ANC provides an opportunity to enquire about IPV among 
women for whom barriers to accessing health care may exist, and also allows for the possibility for 
follow-up during ANC with appropriate supportive interventions, such as counselling and empowerment 
interventions. However, the evidence on benefits and potential harms of clinical enquiry and subsequent 
interventions is lacking or uncertain. 
• A minimum condition for health-care providers to ask women about violence is that it must be safe to do 
so (i.e. the partner is not present) and that identification of IPV is followed by an appropriate response. 
In addition, providers must be trained to ask questions in the correct way and to respond appropriately to 
women who disclose violence (86).
 • Research on IPV is needed to answer the following questions:– Which are the most effective strategies for identifying, preventing and managing IPV in pregnancy?– Does asking routinely about violence impact on ANC attendance?– Can interventions targeted at partners of pregnant women prevent IPV?
 • Detailed guidance on responding to IPV and sexual violence against women can be found in the 
2013 WHO clinical and policy guidelines (86), available at: http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/
 publications/violence/9789241548595/en/
 a Minimum requirements are: a protocol/standard operating procedure; training on how to ask about IPV, and on how to provide the minimum response or 
beyond; private setting; confidentiality ensured; system for referral in place; and time to allow for appropriate disclosure.
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
45
Summary of evidence and considerations
 suggesting that violence commonly starts early in 
women’s relationships (85).
 Effects of universal screening to detect IPV 
compared with no screening (usual care) (EB 
Table B.1.3)
 The evidence on screening for IPV was derived from 
a Cochrane review that included two trials conducted 
in urban ANC settings in HICs (Canada and the 
USA), involving 663 pregnant women (89). In one 
trial, 410 women were randomized before 26 weeks 
of gestation to a computer-based abuse assessment 
screening tool, with and without a provider cue 
sheet (giving the results of the assessment to the 
provider), prior to ANC consultation with a health
care provider. In the other trial (a cluster-RCT), 
providers administered a face-to-face screening 
tool that screened for 15 risk factors, including IPV, 
to women between 12 and 30 weeks of gestation in 
the intervention clusters, while women in the control 
clusters received usual ANC.
 Low-certainty evidence from the review suggests 
that abuse assessment screening may identify more 
pregnant women with IPV than those identified 
through usual ANC (2 trials, 663 women; OR: 4.28, 
95% CI: 1.77–10.36).
 Additional considerations
 n
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 46
 n The review also pooled data on IPV screening 
versus no IPV screening from other health-care 
settings (involving pregnant and non-pregnant 
women), and the pooled effect estimate favoured 
screening to detect IPV (7 trials, 4393 women; OR: 
2.35, 95% CI: 1.53–3.59).
 n
 n Another Cochrane review evaluated interventions 
to prevent or reduce IPV (90). Uncertain evidence 
from one study suggests that pregnant women 
who receive IPV interventions (e.g. multiple 
counselling sessions) to prevent or reduce IPV 
may report fewer episodes of partner violence 
during pregnancy and the postpartum period 
(306 women; RR: 0.62, 95% CI: 0.43–0.88), but 
evidence on this and other outcomes is largely 
inconclusive.
 n
 n Most of the review evidence comes from HICs 
where the prevalence of women experiencing 
IPV in the previous 12 months ranged from 3% 
to 6%. However, in many settings, particularly 
those where economic and sociocultural factors 
foster a culture more permissive of violence 
against women, the lifetime prevalence is higher 
than 30%. Notably, the prevalence among young 
women (under 20 years old) approaches 30%, 
n
 n Severe IPV in pregnancy (such as being beaten up, 
choked or burnt on purpose, being threatened with 
or having a weapon used against her, and sexual 
violence) (85) is more common among women 
who are in relationships that have also been 
severely abusive outside of pregnancy.
 n
 n WHO’s clinical handbook on Health care for women 
subjected to intimate partner violence or sexual 
violence (2014) provides practical guidance on how 
to respond (91).
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.B.1: 
Maternal assessment: Background (p. 41).
 Resources
 Clinical enquiry about IPV can be conducted face
to-face or by providing women with a written or 
computer-based questionnaire. Although the costs 
of implementing these methods can vary, they might 
be relatively low. Subsequent management and IPV 
support linked to the screening intervention, however, 
requires sophisticated training and can therefore have 
significant cost implications. The GDG considered 
that training and resources in low-resource settings 
might be best targeted towards first response to IPV 
rather than IPV screening.
 Equity
 IPV is highly prevalent in many LMICs and among 
disadvantaged populations (92, 93). Effective 
interventions to enquire about IPV in disadvantaged 
populations might help to identify those at risk of IPV
related adverse outcomes, and facilitate the provision 
of appropriate supportive interventions leading to 
improved equity. However, more evidence is needed.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence from a range of settings on 
women’s views of ANC suggests that pregnant 
women would like to be seen by a kind and 
supportive health-care provider who has the time 
to discuss issues of this nature in a private setting 
(high confidence in the evidence) (22). However, 
evidence from LMICs suggests that women may be 
unlikely to respond favourably to cursory exchanges 
of information with providers who they sometimes 
perceive to be hurried, uncaring and occasionally 
abusive (high confidence in the evidence). In addition, 
some women may not appreciate enquiries of this 
nature, particularly those living in male-dominated, 
patriarchal societies, where women’s financial 
dependence on their husbands may influence their 
willingness to discuss IPV, especially if the health 
professional is male (22).
 From the providers’ perspective, qualitative evidence 
mainly from HICs suggests that providers often 
f
 ind it difficult to enquire about for IPV for the 
following reasons: they do not feel they have enough 
knowledge, training or time to discuss IPV in a 
sensitive manner; the presence of the partner acts as 
a barrier; they may have experienced IPV themselves; 
and they lack knowledge and guidance about the 
availability of additional support services (counselling, 
social work, etc.) (high confidence in the evidence). 
Providers highlight the midwife-led continuity of 
care (MLCC) model as a way of achieving a positive, 
trusting and empathetic relationship with pregnant 
women (moderate confidence in the evidence) (see 
Recommendation E.2, in section E: Health systems 
interventions to improve the utilization and quality of 
ANC).
 Feasibility
 Following IPV clinical enquiry, complex, multifaceted, 
culturally specific interventions are required to 
manage IPV, which could be challenging in many low
resource settings. However, emerging evidence from 
HICs shows that medium-duration empowerment 
counselling and advocacy/support, including a safety 
component, offered by trained health-care providers 
could be beneficial, and the feasibility of such 
interventions in LMIC settings needs investigation 
(86).
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
47
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 48
 B.1.4: Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM)
 RECOMMENDATION B1.4: Hyperglycaemia first detected at any time during pregnancy should 
be classified as either gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) or diabetes mellitus in pregnancy, 
according to WHO criteria.a (Recommended)
 Remarks
 • This recommendation has been integrated from the 2013 WHO publication Diagnostic criteria and 
classification of hyperglycaemia first detected in pregnancy (the strength of the recommendation and the 
quality of the evidence were not stated) (94). 
• WHO currently does not have a recommendation on whether or how to screen for GDM, and screening 
strategies for GDM are considered a priority area for research, particularly in LMICs. 
• Diabetes mellitus in pregnancy differs from GDM in that the hyperglycaemia is more severe and does not 
resolve after pregnancy as it does with GDM.
 • A systematic review of cohort studies shows that women with hyperglycaemia (diabetes mellitus 
and GDM) detected during pregnancy are at greater risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes, including 
macrosomia, pre-eclampsia/hypertensive disorders in pregnancy, and shoulder dystocia. Treatment 
of GDM, which usually involves a stepped approach of lifestyle changes (nutritional counselling and 
exercise) followed by oral blood-glucose-lowering agents or insulin if necessary, is effective in reducing 
these poor outcomes (94).
 • There are many uncertainties about the cost–effectiveness of different screening strategies, the 
prevalence of GDM and diabetes mellitus according to the 2013 criteria in diverse populations, and the 
impact of earlier diagnosis on pregnancy outcomes (see Chapter 5: Research implications) (94). 
• The usual window for diagnosing GDM is between 24 and 28 weeks of gestation. Risk factor screening 
is used in some settings as a strategy to determine the need for a 2-hour 75 g oral glucose tolerance test 
(OGTT). These include a BMI of greater than 30 kg/m2, previous GDM, previous macrosomia, family 
history of diabetes mellitus, and ethnicity with a high prevalence of diabetes mellitus (95). In addition, 
glycosuria on dipstick testing (2+ or above on one occasion, or 1+ on two or more occasions) may indicate 
undiagnosed GDM and, if this is observed, performing an OGTT could be considered (95). 
• The management approach for women classified with diabetes mellitus in pregnancy (i.e. severe 
hyperglycaemia first detected in pregnancy) usually differs from the approach for women with GDM, 
particularly when diagnosed early in pregnancy; however, the principles of management are similar and 
both require referral and increased monitoring.
 • Further information and considerations related to this recommendation can be found in the 2013 WHO 
guideline (94), available at: http://www.who.int/diabetes/publications/Hyperglycaemia_In_Pregnancy/
 en/
 a This is not a recommendation on routine screening for hyperglycaemia in pregnancy. It has been adapted and integrated from the 2013 WHO publication (94), 
which states that GDM should be diagnosed at any time in pregnancy if one or more of the following criteria are met: 
• fasting plasma glucose 5.1–6.9 mmol/L (92–125 mg/dL)
 • 1-hour plasma glucose  10.0 mmol/L (180 mg/dL) following a 75 g oral glucose load
 • 2-hour plasma glucose 8.5–11.0 mmol/L (153–199 mg/dL) following a 75 g oral glucose load
 Diabetes mellitus in pregnancy should be diagnosed if one or more of the following criteria are met: 
• fasting plasma glucose  7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL) 
• 2-hour plasma glucose  11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) following a 75 g oral glucose load 
• random plasma glucose  11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) in the presence of diabetes symptoms..
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 49
 B.1.5: Tobacco use
 RECOMMENDATION B.1.5: Health-care providers should ask all pregnant women about their 
tobacco use (past and present) and exposure to second-hand smoke as early as possible in 
pregnancy and at every antenatal care visit. (Recommended)
 Remarks
 • This strong recommendation based on low-quality evidence has been integrated from the 2013 WHO 
recommendations for the prevention and management of tobacco use and second-hand smoke exposure in 
pregnancy (96). Related recommendations from this guideline include the following:
 –Health-care providers should routinely offer advice and psychosocial interventions for tobacco 
cessation to all pregnant women who are either current tobacco users or recent tobacco quitters (strong 
recommendation based on moderate quality evidence).
 –All health-care facilities should be smoke-free to protect the health of all staff, patients and visitors, 
including pregnant women (strong recommendation based on low-quality evidence).
 –Health-care providers should provide pregnant women, their partners and other household members 
with advice and information about the risks of second-hand smoke (SHS) exposure from all forms of 
smoked tobacco, as well as strategies to reduce SHS in the home (strong recommendation based on low
quality evidence).
 –Health-care providers should, wherever possible, engage directly with partners and other household 
members to inform them of all the risks of SHS exposure to pregnant women from all forms of tobacco, 
and to promote reduction of exposure and offer smoking cessation support (strong recommendation 
based on low-quality evidence).
 • Further guidance on strategies to prevent and manage tobacco use and SHS exposure can be found in the 
2013 WHO recommendations (96), available at: http://www.who.int/tobacco/publications/pregnancy/
 guidelinestobaccosmokeexposure/en/
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 50
 B.1.6: Substance use
 RECOMMENDATION B.1.6: Health-care providers should ask all pregnant women about their 
use of alcohol and other substances (past and present) as early as possible in the pregnancy and 
at every antenatal care visit. (Recommended)
 Remarks
 • This strong recommendation based on low-quality evidence has been integrated from the 2014 WHO 
Guidelines for the identification and management of substance use and substance use disorders in pregnancy (97). 
The overarching principles of this guideline aimed to prioritize prevention, ensure access to prevention 
and treatment services, respect women’s autonomy, provide comprehensive care, and safeguard against 
discrimination and stigmatization.
 • The GDG responsible for the recommendation noted that asking women at every ANC visit is important 
as some women are more likely to report sensitive information only after a trusting relationship has been 
established.
 • Pregnant women should be advised of the potential health risks to themselves and to their babies posed by 
alcohol and drug use.
 • Validated screening instruments for alcohol and other substance use and substance use disorders are 
available (refer to Annex 3 of the 2014 guidelines [97]).
 • Health-care providers should be prepared to intervene or refer all pregnant women who are identified as 
using alcohol and/or drugs (past and present).
 • For women identified as being dependent on alcohol or drugs, further recommendations from the guideline 
include the following: 
 –Health-care providers should at the earliest opportunity advise pregnant women dependent on alcohol 
or drugs to cease their alcohol or drug use and offer, or refer them to, detoxification services under 
medical supervision, where necessary and applicable (strong recommendation based on very low-quality 
evidence).
 –Health-care providers should offer a brief intervention to all pregnant women using alcohol or drugs 
(strong recommendation based on low-quality evidence).
 • It was decided that despite the low-quality evidence on effects of brief psychosocial interventions, the 
benefit (potential reduction of alcohol and substance use) outweighed any potential harms, which were 
considered to be minimal. 
• A brief intervention is a structured therapy of short duration (typically 5–30 minutes) offered with the aim 
of assisting an individual to cease or reduce use of a psychoactive substance.
 • Further guidance on interventions and strategies to identify and manage substance use and substance use 
disorders in pregnancy can be found in the 2014 WHO guidelines (97), available at: http://www.who.int/
 substance_abuse/publications/pregnancy_guidelines/en/
B.1.7: Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and syphilis
 RECOMMENDATION B.1.7: In high-prevalence settings,a provider-initiated testing and 
counselling (PITC) for HIV should be considered a routine component of the package of care 
for pregnancy women in all antenatal care settings. In low-prevalence settings, PITC can be 
considered for pregnant women in antenatal care settings as a key component of the effort to 
eliminate mother-to-child transmission of HIV, and to integrate HIV testing with syphilis, viral or 
other key tests, as relevant to the setting, and to strengthen the underlying maternal and child 
health systems. (Recommended)
 Remarks
 • This recommendation has been integrated from the 2015 WHO Consolidated guidelines on HIV testing 
services (98) (the strength of the recommendation and the quality of the evidence were not stated). 
• PITC denotes an HIV testing service that is routinely offered in a health-care facility and includes 
providing pre-test information and obtaining consent, with the option for individuals to decline testing. 
PITC has proved highly acceptable and has increased the uptake of HIV testing in LMICs (98). 
• The availability of HIV testing at ANC services is responsible for the high level of knowledge of HIV status 
among women in many countries, which has allowed women and infants to benefit from ART.
 • WHO recommends that ART should be initiated in all pregnant women diagnosed with HIV at any CD4 
count and continued lifelong (99). This recommendation is based on evidence that shows that providing 
ART to all pregnant and breastfeeding women living with HIV improves individual health outcomes, 
prevents mother-to-child transmission of HIV, and prevents horizontal transmission of HIV from the 
mother to an uninfected sexual partner.
 • Other recommendations relevant to ANC services from the Consolidated guidelines on HIV testing services 
include the following (98):– On disclosure: Initiatives should be put in place to enforce privacy protection and institute policy, 
laws and norms that prevent discrimination and promote tolerance and acceptance of people 
living with HIV. This can help create environments where disclosure of HIV status is easier (strong 
recommendation, low-quality evidence).– On retesting: In settings with a generalized HIV epidemic:b Retest all HIV-negative pregnant women 
in the third trimester, during labour or postpartum because of the high risk of acquiring HIV infection 
during pregnancy (strength of recommendation and quality of evidence not stated). – On retesting: In settings with a concentrated HIV epidemic:c Retest HIV-negative pregnant women 
who are in a serodiscordant couple or from a key population groupd (strength of recommendation and 
quality of evidence not stated). – On retesting before ART initiation: National programmes should retest all people newly and previously 
diagnosed with HIV before they enrol in care and initiate ART (strength of recommendation and quality 
of evidence not stated). – On testing strategies: In settings with greater than 5% HIV prevalence in the population being tested, 
a diagnosis of HIV-positive should be issued to people with two sequential reactive tests. In settings 
with less than 5% HIV prevalence in the population being tested, a diagnosis of HIV-positive should 
be issued to people with three sequential reactive tests (strength of recommendation and quality of 
evidence not stated). – On task shifting: Lay providers who are trained and supervised can independently conduct safe 
and effective HIV testing using rapid diagnostic tests (strong recommendation, moderate-quality 
evidence). 
• Further guidance on HIV testing can be found in the 2015 WHO guidelines (98), available at:  
http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/guidelines/hiv-testing-services/en/
 • In addition, the 2015 Guideline on when to start antiretroviral therapy and on pre-exposure prophylaxis for HIV 
(99) is available at: http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/guidelines/earlyrelease-arv/en/
 • To prevent mother-to-child transmission of syphilis, all pregnant women should be screened for syphilis at 
the first ANC visit in the first trimester and again in the third trimester of pregnancy. For further guidance
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
51
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 52
 on screening, please refer to the 2006 WHO publication Prevention of mother-to-child transmission of 
syphilis (100), available at: http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/maternal_perinatal_
 health/prevention_mtct_syphilis.pdf 
• The latest (2016) WHO guidelines on the treatment of chlamydia, gonorrhoea and syphilis, and on 
the prevention of sexual transmission of Zika virus (101–104), are available at: http://www.who.int/
 reproductivehealth/publications/rtis/clinical/en/
 a High-prevalence settings are defined in the 2015 WHO publication Consolidated guidelines on HIV testing services as settings with greater than 5% HIV 
prevalence in the population being tested. Low-prevalence settings are settings with less than 5% HIV prevalence in the population being tested (98). 
b A generalized HIV epidemic is when HIV is firmly established in the general population. Numerical proxy: HIV prevalence is consistently over 1% in pregnant 
women attending antenatal clinics (98).
 c A concentrated HIV epidemic is when HIV has spread rapidly in a defined subpopulation (or key population, see next footnote) but is not well established in 
the general population (98).
 d Key populations are defined in the 2015 WHO guidelines as the following groups: men who have sex with men, people in prison or other closed settings, 
people who inject drugs, sex workers and transgender people (98).
 B.1.8: Tuberculosis (TB)
 RECOMMENDATION B.1.8: In settings where the tuberculosis (TB) prevalence in the general 
population is 100/100 000 population or higher, systematic screening for active TB should be 
considered for pregnant women as part of antenatal care. (Context-specific recommendation)
 Remarks
 • This recommendation has been adapted and integrated from the 2013 WHO publication Systematic 
screening for active tuberculosis: principles and recommendations, where it was considered a conditional 
recommendation based on very low-quality evidence (105). 
• Systematic screening is defined as the systematic identification of people with suspected active TB in a 
predetermined target group, using tests, examinations or other procedures that can be applied rapidly. 
Options for initial screening include screening for symptoms (either for cough lasting longer than two 
weeks, or any symptoms compatible with TB, including a cough of any duration, haemoptysis, weight loss, 
fever or night sweats) or screening with chest radiography. The use of chest radiography in pregnant women 
poses no significant risk but the national guidelines for the use of radiography during pregnancy should be 
followed (105).
 • Before screening is initiated, high-quality TB diagnosis, treatment, care, management and support should 
be in place, and there should be the capacity to scale these up further to match the anticipated rise in case 
detection that may occur as a result of screening.
 • The panel responsible for making this recommendation noted that it may not be possible to implement it in 
resource-constrained settings.
 • Other recommendations relevant to ANC services from the same publication include the following (105):
 –Household contacts and other close contacts should be systematically screened for TB (strong 
recommendation, very low-quality evidence). 
 –People living with HIV should be systematically screened for active TB at each visit to a health-care 
facility (strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence).
 –Systematic screening for active TB may be considered also for other subpopulations that have very 
poor access to health care, such as people living in urban slums, homeless people, people living in 
remote areas with poor access to health care, and other vulnerable or marginalized groups including 
some indigenous populations, migrants and refugees (conditional recommendation, very low-quality 
evidence).
 • TB increases the risk of preterm birth, perinatal death and other pregnancy complications. Initiating TB 
treatment early is associated with better maternal and infant outcomes than late initiation (105).
 • To better understand the local burden of TB in pregnancy, health systems may benefit from capturing 
pregnancy status in registers that track TB screening and treatment.
 • Further information and considerations related to this recommendation can be found in the 2013 WHO 
recommendations (105), available at: http://www.who.int/tb/tbscreening/en/
B.2: Fetal assessment
 Background
 Assessment of fetal growth and well-being is 
an important part of ANC. The GDG considered 
evidence and other relevant information on the 
following interventions to assess fetal growth and 
well-being in healthy pregnant women not at risk of 
adverse perinatal outcomes:
 n
 n Daily fetal movement counting: Maternal 
perception of reduced fetal movements is 
associated with poor perinatal outcomes, 
including fetal death (106). Daily fetal movement 
counting, such as the Cardiff “count-to-ten” 
method using kick charts, is a way of screening 
for fetal well-being, by which a woman counts 
daily fetal movements to assess the condition 
of her baby. The aim of this is to try to reduce 
perinatal mortality by alerting health workers 
when the baby might be compromised (107). 
Daily fetal movement counting may be used 
routinely in all pregnant women or only in women 
who are considered to be at increased risk of 
adverse perinatal outcomes. Early detection of 
fetal compromise could lead to timely clinical 
interventions to reduce poor perinatal outcomes 
but might lead to maternal anxiety or unnecessary 
clinical interventions. It is also possible that the 
period between decreased fetal movements and 
fetal death might be too short to allow effective 
action to be taken (108).
 n
 n Symphysis-fundal height (SFH) measurement: 
SFH measurement is a commonly-practiced 
method of fetal growth assessment that uses a 
tape measure to measure the SFH, in order to 
detect intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). 
It also has the potential to detect multiple 
pregnancy, macrosomia, polyhydramnios and 
oligohydramnios. For fetuses growing normally, 
from 24 weeks of gestation, the SFH measurement 
in centimetres should correspond to the number 
of weeks of gestation, with an allowance of a 2-cm 
difference either way (109). Other methods of fetal 
growth assessment include abdominal palpation of 
fundal height in relation to anatomical landmarks 
such as the umbilicus and xiphisternum, abdominal 
girth measurement, and serial ultrasound 
measurement of the fetal parameters (109). 
Accurate low-cost methods for detecting abnormal 
growth are desirable because ultrasound, the most 
accurate screening tool, is resource-intensive and 
not widely available in LMICs.
 n
 n Routine antenatal cardiotocography (CTG):  
CTG is a continuous recording of the fetal heart 
rate and uterine contractions obtained via an 
ultrasound transducer placed on the mother’s 
abdomen. CTG is widely used in pregnancy 
as a method of assessing fetal well-being, 
predominantly in pregnancies with increased risk 
of complications and during labour.
 n
 n Fetal ultrasound examination: Diagnostic 
ultrasound examination is employed in a variety 
of specific circumstances during pregnancy, such 
as where there are concerns about fetal growth 
and after clinical complications. However, because 
adverse outcomes may also occur in pregnancies 
without clear risk factors, assumptions have been 
made that antenatal ultrasound examination in 
all pregnancies will prove beneficial by enabling 
earlier detection of problems that may not be 
apparent (110) – such as multiple pregnancies, 
IUGR, congenital anomalies, malpresentation 
and placenta praevia – and by allowing accurate 
gestational age estimation, leading to timely 
and appropriate management of pregnancy 
complications.
 n
 n Fetal Doppler ultrasound examination: Doppler 
ultrasound technology evaluates umbilical artery 
(and other fetal arteries) waveforms to assess 
fetal well-being in the third trimester of pregnancy. 
It is widely used in high-risk pregnancies to 
identify fetal compromise and thus reduce 
perinatal mortality (111, 112). Therefore, it might 
also be useful when performed as an antenatal 
intervention to detect fetal compromise and 
predict complications, particularly IUGR and 
pre-eclampsia, in apparently healthy pregnancies. 
Doppler ultrasound is useful for distinguishing 
between fetuses that are growth-restricted 
(IUGR) and those that are constitutionally small 
(SGA) (113). It can be performed as part of a 
fetal ultrasound examination or separately. The 
examination quantifies blood flow through the 
umbilical artery as either a pulsatility index or a 
resistive index (114). A high resistance to blood 
f
 low often indicates an increased risk of IUGR and 
pre-eclampsia and indicates the need for further 
investigation.
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
53
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 54
 B.2.1: Daily fetal movement counting
 RECOMMENDATION B.2.1: Daily fetal movement counting, such as with “count-to-ten” 
kick charts, is only recommended in the context of rigorous research. (Context-specific 
recommendation – research)
 Remarks
 • Fetal movement counting is when a pregnant woman counts and records her baby’s movements in order 
to monitor the baby’s health. Various methods have been described, with further monitoring variously 
indicated depending on the method used, for example, if fewer than six distinct movements are felt within 
2 hours (115) or fewer than 10 distinct movements are felt within 12 hours (the Cardiff “count to ten” 
method) (106).
 • While daily fetal movement counting is not recommended, healthy pregnant women should be made 
aware of the importance of fetal movements in the third trimester and of reporting reduced fetal 
movements. 
• Clinical enquiry by ANC providers at each ANC visit about maternal perception of fetal movements is 
recommended as part of good clinical practice. Women who perceive poor or reduced fetal movements 
require further monitoring (e.g. with daily fetal movement counting) and investigation, if indicated. 
• The GDG agreed that more research is needed on the effects of daily fetal movement counting in the third 
trimester of pregnancy, particularly in LMIC settings with a high prevalence of unexplained stillbirths.
 Women’s values
 A scoping review of what women want from ANC and what outcomes they value informed the ANC guideline (13). 
Evidence showed that women from high-, medium- and low-resource settings valued having a positive pregnancy 
experience. Within the context of maternal and fetal assessment, women valued the opportunity to receive screening 
and tests to optimize their health and that of their baby as long as individual procedures were explained to them 
clearly and administered by knowledgeable, supportive and respectful health-care practitioners (high confidence in 
the evidence).
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of daily maternal fetal movement 
counting compared with standard ANC (EB 
Table B.2.1)
 The evidence on the effects of daily fetal movement 
counting was derived from a Cochrane review 
(107). Two RCTs from HICs contributed data for this 
comparison. One was a large, multicentre, cluster 
RCT (68 654 women) conducted in Belgium, Ireland, 
Sweden, the United Kingdom and the USA, which 
compared a “count-to-ten” fetal movement counting 
kick chart with standard ANC in women with 
uncomplicated pregnancies recruited between 28 
and 32 weeks of gestation. Women in the standard 
ANC group were asked about fetal movements at 
each ANC visit. The other trial was a multicentre 
RCT conducted in Norway involving 1123 women that 
compared a modified “count-to-ten” fetal movement 
counting protocol with standard care.
 Maternal outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that daily fetal 
movement counting may make little or no difference 
to caesarean section (1 trial, 1076 women; RR: 0.93, 
95% CI: 0.60–1.44) or assisted vaginal delivery rates 
(1 trial, 1076 women; RR: 1.04, 95% CI: 0.65–1.66).
 With regard to maternal satisfaction, low-certainty 
evidence suggests that daily fetal movement counting 
may reduce mean anxiety scores (1 trial, 1013 women; 
standardized MD: –0.22, 95% CI: –0.35 to –0.10).
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that there may be 
little or no difference to preterm birth (1 trial, 1076 
Resources
 neonates; RR: 0.81, 95% CI: 0.46–1.46) and low birth 
weight (1 trial, 1076 neonates; RR: 0.98, 95% CI: 
0.66–1.44) with daily fetal movement counting.
 There were no perinatal deaths in the Norwegian 
trial (1076 women). Low-certainty evidence from the 
large cluster RCT, which reported the weighted mean 
difference in stillbirth rates between intervention 
and control clusters, suggests that fetal movement 
counting may make little or no difference to stillbirth 
rates (weighted MD: 0.23, 95% CI: –0.61 to 1.07).
 Additional considerations
 n
 n These trials were conducted in HICs with low 
stillbirth rates, therefore the findings on effects 
may not apply equally to settings with high 
stillbirth rates.
 n
 n In the cluster RCT, despite fetal movement 
counting, most fetuses detected as being 
compromised by reduced fetal movements had 
died by the time the mothers received medical 
attention.
 n
 n There was a trend towards increased CTG and 
antenatal hospital admissions in the intervention 
clusters of the cluster RCT. Antenatal hospital 
admissions were also more frequent in the 
intervention arm of the Norwegian RCT (107).
 n
 n Findings from an additional RCT that was 
unpublished at the time of the Cochrane review 
support the Cochrane evidence that daily fetal 
movement counting may reduce maternal anxiety 
(115).
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.B.2: Fetal 
assessment: Background (p. 54). 
Fetal movement counting is a low-cost intervention 
on its own, but it could be resource-intensive if it 
leads to unnecessary additional interventions or 
hospital admissions.
 Equity
 LMICs bear the global burden of perinatal morbidity 
and mortality, and women who are poor, least 
educated and residing in rural areas of LMICs have 
lower ANC coverage and worse pregnancy outcomes 
than more advantaged women (29). Therefore, 
simple, effective, low-cost antenatal interventions to 
assess fetal well-being could help to address health 
inequalities by improving detection of complications 
in low-resource settings.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence shows that women generally 
appreciate the knowledge and information they can 
acquire from health-care providers during ANC visits, 
provided this is explained properly and delivered in 
a consistent, caring and culturally sensitive manner 
(high confidence in the evidence) (22). It also shows 
that health professionals want to give appropriate 
information and advice to women but sometimes 
they don’t feel suitably trained to do so (high 
confidence in the evidence) (45).
 Feasibility
 From the perspective of women who live far from 
ANC clinics and who may not have the resources or 
time to attend ANC regularly, and the perspective 
of ANC providers with limited resources, this 
intervention may offer a practical and cost–effective 
approach to monitoring fetal well-being if it’s shown 
to be effective (high confidence in the evidence)  
(22, 45).
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
55
B.2.2: Symphysis-fundal height (SFH) measurement
 RECOMMENDATION B.2.2: Replacing abdominal palpation with symphysis-fundal height (SFH) 
measurement for the assessment of fetal growth is not recommended to improve perinatal 
outcomes. A change from what is usually practiced (abdominal palpation or SFH measurement) 
in a particular setting is not recommended. (Context-specific recommendation)
 Remarks
 • SFH measurement is routinely practiced in many ANC settings. Due to a lack of clear evidence of 
accuracy or superiority of either SFH measurement or clinical palpation to assess fetal growth, the GDG 
does not recommend a change of practice. 
• The GDG agreed that there is a lack of evidence on SFH, rather than a lack of effectiveness, particularly in 
LMIC settings.
 • Apart from false reassurance, which might occur with both SFH measurement and clinical palpation, 
there is no evidence of harm with SFH measurement.
 • Research is needed to determine the role of SFH measurement in detecting abnormal fetal growth and 
other risk factors for perinatal morbidity (e.g. multiple pregnancy, polyhydramnios) in settings where 
antenatal ultrasound is not available.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of SFH measurement versus abdominal 
palpation (EB Table B.2.2)
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 56
 The evidence on the effects of SFH measurement 
was derived from a Cochrane review that included 
only one trial conducted in Denmark involving 
1639 pregnant women enrolled at about 14 
weeks of gestation (109). SFH measurement or 
abdominal palpation were performed from 28 
weeks of gestation. Most women had at least three 
assessments, with measurements plotted on a chart.
 Maternal outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that there may be 
little or no difference in the effect of SFH measurement 
versus clinical palpation on caesarean section (1639 
women; RR: 0.72, 95% CI: 0.31–1.67) and induction of 
labour (1639 women; RR: 0.84, 95% CI: 0.45–1.58).
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence shows that SFH 
measurement versus clinical palpation probably makes 
little or no difference to the antenatal detection of SGA 
neonates (1639 women; RR: 1.32, 95% CI: 0.92–1.90) 
and low-certainty evidence suggests that it may make 
little or no difference to perinatal mortality (1639 
women; RR: 1.25, 95% CI: 0.38–4.07). No other ANC 
guideline outcomes were reported in the review.
 Additional considerations
 n
 n The GDG also considered evidence from a test 
accuracy review regarding the accuracy of SFH 
in predicting SGA at birth (birthweight < 10th 
centile), where SGA was a proxy outcome for 
IUGR (116). The DTA review included seven 
studies conducted in HICs, which used different 
measurement thresholds to detect SGA. SFH 
measurement had a sensitivity ranging from 0.27 
to 0.76, suggesting that it fails to identify up to 
73% of pregnancies affected by SGA at birth. 
However, there was generally a high degree of 
specificity (0.79–0.92), suggesting that a normal 
SFH measurement may be a reasonable indicator 
of a healthy baby. In practice, this could mean that 
few healthy pregnancies are referred for ultrasound 
examination; however, most true SGA cases may 
be missed. Comparable test accuracy evidence on 
abdominal palpation is not available.
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.B.2: Fetal 
assessment: Background (p. 54).
 Resources
 Both abdominal palpation and SFH measurement are 
low-cost interventions with the main cost being staff 
training. SFH requires tape measures to be available.
 Equity
 LMICs bear the global burden of perinatal morbidity 
and mortality, and women who are poor, least 
educated and residing in rural areas of LMICs have 
lower ANC coverage and worse pregnancy outcomes 
than more advantaged women (29). Therefore, 
simple, effective, low-cost, routine antenatal 
interventions to assess fetal well-being could help to 
address health inequalities by improving detection of 
complications in low-resource settings.
 Acceptability
 SFH and clinical palpation are non-invasive approaches 
for fetal assessment, which are widely used and not 
known to be associated with acceptability issues. 
B.2.3: Antenatal cardiotocography (CTG)
 However, in some settings women experience a sense 
of shame during physical examinations, and this 
needs to be addressed with sensitivity by health-care 
providers (low confidence in the evidence) (22).
 Feasibility
 Both methods are considered equally feasible, 
provided tape measures are available.
 RECOMMENDATION B.2.3: Routine antenatal cardiotocography is not recommended for 
pregnant women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes. (Not recommended)
 Remarks
 • CTG is the continuous recording of the fetal heart rate and uterine contractions obtained via an 
ultrasound transducer placed on the mother’s abdomen.
 • There is currently no evidence on effects or other considerations that supports the use of antenatal 
(prelabour) CTG as part of routine ANC.
 • A lack of evidence of benefits associated with CTG in high-risk pregnancies suggests that the evaluation 
of antenatal CTG in healthy pregnant women is not a research priority.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of routine antenatal CTG versus no 
routine antenatal CTG (EB Table B.2.3)
 A Cochrane review of routine antenatal CTG for fetal 
assessment identified no eligible studies of routine 
CTG and all six included studies involved women with 
high-risk pregnancies (117).
 n
 Additional considerations
 n Low-certainty evidence on antenatal CTG in high
risk pregnancies suggests that this intervention 
may have little or no effect on perinatal mortality 
and caesarean section (117).
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.B.2: Fetal 
assessment: Background (p. 54).
 Resources
 CTG machines are costly (starting from about 
US$ 450)4, require maintenance and supplies of 
ultrasound gel, and require staff training in their use 
and interpretation. 
4 Crude estimate based on Internet search.
 Equity
 Simple, effective, low-cost, antenatal interventions to 
assess fetal well-being could help to address health 
inequalities by improving detection of complications 
in low-resource settings, which bear the burden of 
perinatal mortality.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence from a variety of settings 
indicates that women generally appreciate the use of 
technology to monitor pregnancy (high confidence 
in the evidence), and a lack of modern equipment at 
ANC facilities in LMICs may discourage women from 
attending (moderate confidence in the evidence) 
(22). However, in some LMICs, women hold the belief 
that pregnancy is a healthy condition and may be 
resistant to CTG use unless they have experienced a 
previous pregnancy complication (high confidence 
in the evidence). Acceptability may be further 
compromised if the reasons for using CTG are not 
properly explained (high confidence in the evidence).
 Feasibility
 Health-care providers in LMIC settings feel that a 
lack of modern equipment and training limits the 
implementation of this type of intervention (high 
confidence in the evidence) (45).
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
57
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 58
 a Two members of the GDG (Lisa Noguchi and Charlotte Warren) indicated that they would prefer to recommend this intervention in specific contexts with 
capacity to conduct close monitoring and evaluation to ensure a basic standard of implementation (including adequate capacity to diagnose and manage 
complications) and monitor for potential adverse effects on delivery of other critical maternal and newborn health interventions.
 B.2.4: Ultrasound scan
 RECOMMENDATION B.2.4: One ultrasound scan before 24 weeks of gestation (early 
ultrasound) is recommended for pregnant women to estimate gestational age, improve detection 
of fetal anomalies and multiple pregnancies, reduce induction of labour for post-term pregnancy, 
and improve a woman’s pregnancy experience. (Recommended)
 Remarks
 • The benefits of an early ultrasound scan are not improved upon and cannot be replicated with a late 
ultrasound scan where there has not been an early ultrasound scan. Therefore, an ultrasound scan after 
24 weeks of gestation (late ultrasound) is not recommended for pregnant women who have had an early 
ultrasound scan. However, stakeholders should consider offering a late ultrasound scan to pregnant 
women who have not had an early ultrasound scan, for the purposes of identifying the number of fetuses, 
presentation and placental location. 
• The GDG noted that the effects of introducing antenatal ultrasound on population health outcomes and 
health systems in rural, low-resource settings are unproven. However, the introduction of ultrasound to 
detect pregnancy complications and confirm fetal viability to the woman and her family in these settings 
could plausibly increase ANC service utilization and reduce morbidity and mortality, when accompanied 
by appropriate gestational age estimation, diagnosis, referral and management. 
• The ongoing multicountry trial that is under way should contribute further evidence on health effects, 
health care utilization and implementation-related information on ultrasound in rural, low-resource 
settings (118). 
• The GDG acknowledged that the use of early pregnancy ultrasound has not been shown to reduce 
perinatal mortality. The GDG put emphasis on other benefits of ultrasound (mentioned in points above) 
and the increased accuracy of gestational age assessment, which would assist management in case of 
suspected preterm birth and reduce labour induction for post-term pregnancies.
 • The GDG acknowledges that implementing and scaling up this recommendation in low-resource settings 
will be associated with a variety of challenges that may include political (budgeting for fees and tariffs), 
logistical (equipment maintenance, supplies, technical support), infrastructural (ensuring a reliable power 
supply and secure storage) and resources.
 • The GDG noted that antenatal ultrasound is an intervention that can potentially be task shifted from 
trained sonographers and doctors to trained nurses, midwives and clinical officers, provided that ongoing 
training, staff retention, quality improvement activities and supervision are ensured.
 • Stakeholders might be able to offset/reduce the cost of antenatal ultrasound if the ultrasound equipment 
is also used for other indications (e.g. obstetric emergencies) or by other medical departments.
 • The implementation and impact of this recommendation on health outcomes, facility utilization and 
equity should be monitored at the health service, regional and country levels, based on clearly defined 
criteria and indicators associated with locally agreed targets.a 
• For further guidance, please refer to the WHO Manual of diagnostic ultrasound (119), available at:  
http://www.who.int/medical_devices/publications/manual_ultrasound_pack1-2/en/
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 a) Effects of an ultrasound scan before 24 weeks 
of gestation (early ultrasound scan) versus 
selective ultrasound scan (EB Table B.2.4a)
 The evidence on early ultrasound was derived from 
a Cochrane review that included 11 RCTs conducted 
in Australia, Norway, South Africa, Sweden, the 
United Kingdom and the USA, involving 37 505 
women (120). The intervention in all trials involved 
an ultrasound scan before 24 weeks of gestation, 
with women in the control arm undergoing selective 
scans if indicated (or, in one study, concealed 
scans, the results of which were not shared with 
clinicians unless requested). The scans usually 
included assessment of gestational age (biparietal 
diameter with or without head circumference and 
femur length), fetal anatomy, number of fetuses and 
location of the placenta. Scans were performed in 
most trials between 10 and 20 weeks of gestation, 
with three trials evaluating scans before 14 weeks, 
and three trials evaluating an intervention comprising 
both early (at 18–20 weeks) and late scans (at 31–33 
weeks).
 Maternal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence suggests that an early 
ultrasound scan probably has little or no effect on 
caesarean section rates (5 trials, 22 193 women; RR: 
1.05; 95% CI: 0.98–1.12). However, low-certainty 
evidence suggests that early ultrasound may lead 
to a reduction in induction of labour for post-term 
pregnancy (8 trials, 25 516 women; RR: 0.59, 95% CI: 
0.42–0.83).
 Regarding maternal satisfaction, low-certainty 
evidence suggests that fewer women may report 
feeling worried about their pregnancy after an early 
ultrasound scan (1 trial, 635 women; RR: 0.80, 95% 
CI: 0.65–0.99).
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that early 
ultrasound scans may increase the detection of 
congenital anomalies (2 trials, 17 158 women; RR: 
3.46, 95% CI: 1.67–7.14). However, detection rates 
were low for both groups (16% vs 4%, respectively) 
with 346/387 neonates with abnormalities (89%) 
being undetected by 24 weeks of gestation.
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that early 
ultrasound may make little or no difference to 
perinatal mortality (10 trials, 35 737 births; RR: 0.89, 
95% CI: 0.70–1.12) and low birth weight (4 trials, 
15 868 neonates; RR: 1.04, 95% CI: 0.82–1.33). 
Moderate-certainty evidence also shows that it 
probably has little or no effect on SGA (3 trials, 17 105 
neonates; RR: 1.05, 95% CI: 0.81–1.35).
 b) Effects of an ultrasound scan after 24 weeks 
of gestation (late ultrasound scan) versus no late 
ultrasound scan (EB Table B.2.4b)
 This evidence on late ultrasound was derived from 
a Cochrane review that included 13 RCTs conducted 
in HICs (121). Most women in these trials underwent 
early ultrasound scan and were randomized to receive 
an additional third trimester scan or to selective or 
concealed ultrasound scan. The purpose of the late 
scan in these trials, which was usually performed 
between 30 and 36 weeks of gestation, variably 
included assessment of fetal anatomy, estimated 
weight, amniotic fluid volume and/or placental 
maturity.
 Maternal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence suggests that a late 
ultrasound scan probably has little or no effect on 
caesarean section (6 trials, 22 663 women; RR: 1.03, 
95% CI: 0.92–1.15), instrumental delivery (5 trials, 
12 310 women; RR: 1.05, 95% CI: 0.95–1.16) and 
induction of labour (6 trials, 22 663 women; RR: 0.93, 
95% CI: 0.81–1.07). Maternal satisfaction was not 
assessed in this review.
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence suggests that a late 
ultrasound scan probably has little or no effect 
on perinatal mortality (8 trials, 30 675 births; RR: 
1.01, 95% CI: 0.67–1.54) and preterm birth (2 trials, 
17 151 neonates; RR: 0.96, 95% CI: 0.85–1.08). Low
certainty evidence suggests that it may have little or 
no effect on SGA (4 trials, 20 293 neonates; RR: 0.98, 
95% CI: 0.74–1.28) and low birth weight (3 trials, 
4510 neonates; RR: 0.92, 95% CI: 0.71–1.18).
 Additional considerations
 n
 n The evidence on ultrasound is derived mainly 
from HICs, where early ultrasound is a standard 
component of ANC to establish an accurate 
gestational age and identify pregnancy 
complications. The impact of ultrasound screening 
in low-resource settings is currently unknown but 
the low rates of maternal and perinatal mortality 
experienced in HICs indirectly suggests that 
ultrasound is an important component of quality 
ANC services.
 n
 n Evidence from the Cochrane review on early 
ultrasound suggests that multiple pregnancies may 
be less likely to be missed/undetected by 24–26 
weeks of gestation with early ultrasound (120). 
Of 295 multiple pregnancies occurring in seven 
trials (approximately 24 000 trial participants), 
1% (2/153) were undetected by 24–26 weeks 
of gestation with early ultrasound screening 
compared with 39% (56/142) in the control group 
(RR: 0.07, 95% CI: 0.03–0.17; graded by review 
authors as low-quality evidence).
 n
 n The Cochrane review also evaluated several safety 
outcomes in offspring and found no evidence of 
differences in school performance, vision and 
hearing, disabilities or dyslexia.
 n
 n An ongoing multicountry cluster RCT of antenatal 
ultrasound in the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo, Guatemala, Kenya, Pakistan and Zambia 
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
59
Acceptability
 should contribute data on health outcomes and 
health care utilization, as well as implementation
related information on ultrasound in rural, low
resource settings (118). The trial intervention 
involves a two-week obstetric ultrasound training 
course for health workers (e.g. midwives, nurses, 
clinical officers) to perform ultrasound scans at 
18–22 weeks and 32–36 weeks of gestation in each 
participant enrolled.
 n
 n Accurate gestational age dating is critical for the 
appropriate delivery of time-sensitive interventions 
in pregnancy, as well as management of pregnancy 
complications, particularly pre-eclampsia and 
preterm birth, which are major causes of maternal 
and perinatal morbidity and mortality in LMICs, 
and early ultrasound is useful for this purpose.
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.B.2: Fetal 
assessment: Background (p. 54).
 Resources
 The cost of ultrasound equipment, especially portable 
compact units, has decreased (122), and they are 
currently available at less than US$ 10 000 (28). 
Thus, given the cost of equipment, maintenance, 
supplies (ultrasound gel), replacement batteries, 
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 60
 initial and ongoing staff training and supervision, and 
staffing costs (allowing 15–45 minutes per scan), 
routine ultrasound scans may have considerable 
resource implications for LMIC settings.
 Equity
 Effective interventions to increase uptake and quality 
of ANC services, and improve the experience of 
care, are needed in LMICs to prevent maternal and 
perinatal mortality and improve equity. However, if 
women are expected to pay for ultrasound scans, 
or if scans are not available to women living in rural 
areas due to feasibility issues, this intervention could 
perpetuate inequalities. In addition, ultrasound sexing 
of the fetus in some low-income countries has a 
negative impact on gender equity and needs to be 
monitored.
 Qualitative evidence shows that women generally 
appreciate the knowledge and information they can 
acquire from health-care providers and that they 
are willing to be screened and tested for a variety of 
conditions, provided the information and procedures 
are explained properly and delivered in a caring 
and culturally sensitive manner (high confidence 
in the evidence) (22). Evidence also shows that, in 
some LMICs, the lack of modern technology (like 
ultrasound equipment) at ANC facilities discourages 
some women from attending (high confidence in 
the evidence) (22). This suggests that the offer of 
ultrasound might attract women to use ANC facilities, 
which may also lead to earlier ANC attendance. 
Specific studies not included in the main qualitative 
review indicate that women value the opportunity 
to see their baby via ultrasound and find the test 
reassuring (123). However, there is some evidence 
that women do not understand that ultrasound is 
a diagnostic tool, and that adverse findings during 
scans might increase anxiety and distress (124).
 Qualitative evidence from health-care providers 
shows that they generally want to provide screening 
and testing procedures, but sometimes don’t feel 
suitably trained to do so (high confidence in the 
evidence) (45). This suggests that they might 
welcome ultrasound scans to assist with accurate 
gestational age estimation and to identify potential 
risk factors, such as multiple pregnancies, if 
appropriately trained and supported.
 Feasibility
 Feasibility challenges of antenatal ultrasound scans 
in LMICs includes equipment procurement and staff 
training, ensuring a power supply (via a power point 
or rechargeable batteries) and secure storage, regular 
equipment maintenance, maintaining adequate and 
continual supplies of ultrasound gel, and ongoing 
technical support and supervision.
B.2.5: Doppler ultrasound of fetal blood vessels
 RECOMMENDATION B.2.5: Routine Doppler ultrasound examination is not recommended for 
pregnant women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes. (Not recommended)
 Remarks
 • The GDG noted that the evidence base for the use of Doppler ultrasound of fetal blood vessels in high
risk pregnancy is already established.
 • The GDG agreed that the value of a single Doppler ultrasound examination of fetal blood vessels for all 
pregnant women in the third trimester needs rigorous evaluation, particularly in LMIC settings. Future 
trials should be designed to evaluate the effect of a single Doppler ultrasound on preventable perinatal 
deaths.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of Doppler ultrasound examination of 
fetal blood vessels compared with no Doppler 
ultrasound examination (EB Table B.2.5)
 The evidence on Doppler ultrasound examination 
was derived from a Cochrane review that included 
f
 ive trials involving 14 624 women in HICs (Australia, 
France and the United Kingdom) (114). One study 
evaluated a single Doppler examination at 28–34 
weeks of gestation, three studies evaluated multiple 
Doppler examinations from as early as 18 weeks, 
and one study evaluated women undergoing single 
or multiple examinations from 26 to 36 weeks 
of gestation. Data were evaluated together and 
separately for single and multiple examinations. 
Women in the control arms received standard ANC 
with no (or concealed) Doppler examination.
 Maternal outcomes
 The available moderate-certainty evidence suggests 
that antenatal Doppler ultrasound probably makes 
little or no difference to caesarean section rates 
(2 trials, 6373 women; RR: 0.98, 95% CI: 0.85–1.13) 
and assisted vaginal birth (2 trials, 6884 women; 
RR: 1.04, 95% CI: 0.96–1.12). No other maternal 
outcomes that were prioritized for the ANC guideline 
were reported in the trials.
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that Doppler 
ultrasound may have little or no effect on perinatal 
mortality (4 trials, 11 183 women; RR: 0.80, 95% CI: 
0.35–1.83). Moderate-certainty evidence indicates 
that the intervention probably has little or no effect 
on preterm birth (4 trials, 12 162 women; RR: 1.02, 
95% CI: 0.87–1.18).
 Additional considerations
 n
 n Subgroup analyses according to the number 
of Doppler ultrasound examinations (single or 
multiple) are largely consistent with the overall 
f
 indings. However, low-certainty evidence from the 
single examination subgroup suggests that a single 
Doppler ultrasound examination might reduce 
perinatal mortality (1 trial, 3890 women; RR: 0.36, 
95% CI: 0.13–0.99).
 Values
 Please see “Women’s values” in section 3.B.2: Fetal 
assessment: Background (p. 54).
 Resources
 The cost of ultrasound equipment, especially portable 
compact units, has decreased (122), and they are 
currently available at less than US$ 10 000 (28). 
Thus, given the cost of equipment, maintenance, 
supplies (ultrasound gel), replacement batteries, 
initial and ongoing staff training and supervision, and 
staffing costs, routine Doppler ultrasound scans may 
have considerable resource implications for LMIC 
settings.
 Equity
 RCT evidence on maternal and perinatal effects of 
Doppler ultrasound examination is currently derived 
from HICs and high-quality research is needed on 
this intervention in LMICs to determine whether, by 
improving detection of pregnancy complications, it 
can reduce perinatal mortality and improve health 
equity.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence shows that women generally 
appreciate the knowledge and information they can 
acquire from health-care providers and that they 
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
61
are willing to be screened and tested for a variety of 
conditions, provided the information and procedures 
are explained properly and delivered in a caring 
and culturally sensitive manner (high confidence 
in the evidence) (22). Evidence also shows that, in 
some LMICs, the lack of modern technology (like 
ultrasound equipment) at ANC facilities discourages 
some women from attending (high confidence in the 
evidence) (22).
 Qualitative evidence from health-care providers 
shows that they generally want to provide screening 
and testing procedures, but sometimes don’t feel 
suitably trained to do so (high confidence in the 
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 62
 evidence) (45). This suggests that they might 
welcome Doppler ultrasound scans to identify 
potential risk factors, if appropriately trained and 
supported.
 Feasibility
 Feasibility challenges of Doppler ultrasound scans 
in LMICs include equipment procurement and staff 
training, ensuring a power supply (via a power point 
or rechargeable batteries) and secure storage, regular 
equipment maintenance, maintaining adequate and 
continual supplies of ultrasound gel, and ongoing 
technical support and supervision.
C. Preventive measures
 Background
 The GDG considered the evidence and other relevant 
information to inform recommendations on antenatal 
interventions to prevent the following conditions.
 n
 n Asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB): Defined as true 
bacteriuria in the absence of specific symptoms 
of acute urinary tract infection, ASB is common 
in pregnancy, with rates as high as 74% reported 
in some LMICs (125). Escherichia coli is associated 
with up to 80% of isolates (83). Other pathogens 
include Klebsiella species, Proteus mirabilis and 
group B streptococcus (GBS). While ASB in non
pregnant women is generally benign, in pregnant 
women obstruction to the flow of urine by the 
growing fetus and womb leads to stasis in the 
urinary tract and increases the likelihood of acute 
pyelonephritis. If untreated, up to 45% of pregnant 
women with ASB may develop this complication 
(126), which is associated with an increased risk of 
preterm birth.
 n
 n Recurrent urinary tract infections: A recurrent 
urinary tract infection (RUTI) is a symptomatic 
infection of the urinary tract (bladder and kidneys) 
that follows the resolution of a previous urinary 
tract infection (UTI), generally after treatment. 
Definitions of RUTI vary and include two UTIs 
within the previous six months, or a history of one 
or more UTIs before or during pregnancy (127). 
RUTIs are common in women who are pregnant 
and have been associated with adverse pregnancy 
outcomes including preterm birth and small-for
gestational-age newborns (127). Pyelonephritis 
(infection of the kidneys) is estimated to occur in 
2% of pregnancies, with a recurrence rate of up to 
23% within the same pregnancy or soon after the 
birth (128). Little is known about the best way to 
prevent RUTI in pregnancy.
 n
 n Rhesus D alloimmunization: Rhesus (Rh) negative 
mothers can develop Rh antibodies if they have an 
Rh-positive newborn, causing haemolytic disease 
of the newborn (HDN) in subsequent pregnancies. 
Administering anti-D immunoglobulin to Rh
negative women within 72 hours of giving birth 
to an Rh-positive baby is an effective way of 
preventing RhD alloimmunization and HDN (129). 
However, Rhesus alloimmunization occurring in 
the third trimester due to occult transplacental 
haemorrhages will not be prevented by postpartum 
anti-D.
 n
 n Soil-transmitted helminthiasis: Over 50% of 
pregnant women in LMICs suffer from anaemia, 
and helminthiasis is a major contributory cause 
in endemic areas (33). Soil-transmitted helminths 
are parasitic infections caused mainly by 
roundworms (Ascaris lumbricoides), hookworms 
(Necator americanus and Ancylostoma duodenale), 
and whipworms (Trichuris trichiura). These worms 
(particularly hookworms) feed on blood and 
cause further bleeding by releasing anticoagulant 
compounds, thereby causing iron-deficiency 
anaemia (130). They may also reduce the 
absorption of iron and other nutrients by causing 
anorexia, vomiting and diarrhoea (131).
 n
 n Neonatal tetanus: Tetanus is an acute disease 
caused by an exotoxin produced by Clostridium 
tetani. Neonatal infection usually occurs through 
the exposure of the unhealed umbilical cord stump 
to tetanus spores, which are universally present in 
soil, and newborns need to have received maternal 
antibodies via the placenta to be protected at birth. 
Neonatal disease usually presents within the first 
two weeks of life and involves generalized rigidity 
and painful muscle spasms, which in the absence 
of medical treatment leads to death in most 
cases (132). Global vaccination programmes have 
reduced the global burden of neonatal tetanus 
deaths and continue to do so; estimates show a 
reduction from an estimated 146 000 in 2000 
to 58 000 (CI: 20 000–276 000) in 2010 (133). 
However, because tetanus spores are ubiquitous 
in the environment, eradication is not biologically 
feasible and high immunization coverage remains 
essential (134).
 In addition to GDG recommendations on the 
above, this section of the guideline includes 
two recommendations on disease prevention in 
pregnancy that have been integrated from WHO 
guidelines on malaria and HIV prevention that are 
relevant to routine ANC.
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
63
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 64
 C.1: Antibiotics for asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB)
 RECOMMENDATION C.1: A seven-day antibiotic regimen is recommended for all pregnant 
women with asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB) to prevent persistent bacteriuria, preterm birth 
and low birth weight. (Recommended)
 Remarks
 • This recommendation should be considered alongside the recommendation on ASB diagnosis 
(Recommendation B.1.2).
 • Stakeholders may wish to consider context-specific ASB screening and treatment based on ASB and 
preterm birth prevalence, as it may not be appropriate in settings with low prevalence.
 • Evidence on preterm birth is of low certainty and large multicentre trials are needed to confirm whether 
screening and antibiotic treatment reduces preterm birth and perinatal mortality in LMICs. Such trials 
should also aim to evaluate the effects of group B streptococcus (GBS) screening and treatment.
 • Studies have shown that GBS bacteriuria is a sign of heavy GBS colonization, which may not be 
eradicated by antibiotic treatment. GBS bacteriuria is a risk factor for having an infant with early onset 
GBS disease. WHO recommends that pregnant women with GBS colonization receive intrapartum 
antibiotic administration to prevent early neonatal GBS infection (see WHO recommendations for 
prevention and treatment of maternal peripartum infections [135]).
 • Preterm birth indicators should be monitored with this intervention, as should changes in antimicrobial 
resistance.
 Women’s values
 A scoping review of what women want from ANC and what outcomes they value informed the ANC guideline (13). 
Evidence showed that women from high-, medium- and low-resource settings valued having a positive pregnancy 
experience. This included the tailored (rather than routine) use of biomedical tests and effective preventive 
interventions to optimize pregnancy and newborn health, and the ability of health-care practitioners to explain and 
deliver these procedures in a knowledgeable, supportive and respectful manner (high confidence in the evidence).
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of antibiotics for ASB versus no 
antibiotics or placebo (EB Table C.1)
 The evidence on the effects of antibiotics for ASB 
was derived from a Cochrane review that included 
14 trials involving approximately 2000 women (83). 
Most trials were conducted in HICs between 1960 
and 1987. Types of antibiotics included sulfonamides, 
ampicillin, nitrofurantoin and some antibiotics that 
are no longer recommended for use in pregnancy, 
such as tetracycline. Treatment duration between 
trials varied widely from a single dose, to continuous 
treatment throughout pregnancy. Bacteriuria 
was usually defined as at least one clean-catch, 
midstream or catheterized urine specimen with more 
than 100 000 bacteria/mL on culture, but other 
definitions were also used.
 Maternal outcomes
 The only maternal ANC guideline outcomes reported 
were infection outcomes. Low-certainty evidence 
suggests that antibiotics may reduce persistent 
bacteriuria (4 trials, 596 women; RR: 0.30, 95% CI: 
0.18–0.53); however, the evidence on the effect on 
pyelonephritis is very uncertain.
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that antibiotics for 
ASB may reduce low-birth-weight neonates (8 trials, 
1437 neonates; RR: 0.64, 95% CI: 0.45–0.93) and 
preterm birth (2 trials, 142 women; RR: 0.27, 95% CI: 
0.11–0.62). No other ANC guideline outcomes were 
reported.
 Additional considerations
 n nThe GDG also evaluated evidence on treatment 
duration (single dose versus short-course 
[4–7 days]) from a related Cochrane review that 
included 13 trials involving 1622 women (136). Ten 
trials compared different durations of treatment 
with the same antibiotic, and the remaining three 
compared different durations of treatment with 
different drugs. A wide variety of antibiotics was 
used. The resulting pooled evidence on bacterial 
persistence (7 trials), recurrent ASB (8 trials) 
and pyelonephritis (2 trials) was judged as 
very uncertain. However, on sensitivity analysis 
including high-quality trials of amoxicillin and 
nitrofurantoin only, the high-certainty evidence 
indicates that bacterial persistence is reduced 
with a short course rather than a single dose (2 
trials, 803 women; RR: 1.72, 95% CI: 1.27–2.33). 
High-certainty evidence from one large trial shows 
that a seven-day course of nitrofurantoin is more 
effective than a one-day treatment to reduce low 
birth weight (714 neonates; RR: 1.65, 95% CI: 
1.06–2.57). Low-certainty evidence suggests that 
single-dose treatments may be associated with 
fewer side-effects (7 trials, 1460 women; RR: 0.70, 
95% CI: 0.56–0.88). See Web supplement (EB 
Table C.1).
 n
 n The GDG also evaluated evidence on the test 
accuracy of urine Gram staining and dipstick 
testing (see Recommendation B.1.2 in section 3.B).
 Values
 See “Women’s values” at the beginning of section 3.C: 
Background (p. 64).
 Resources
 Antibiotic costs vary. Amoxicillin and trimethoprim 
are much cheaper (potentially around US$ 1–2 for a 
week’s supply) than nitrofurantoin, which can cost 
about US$ 7–10 for a week’s supply of tablets (137). 
Repeated urine testing to check for clearance of 
ASB has cost implications for laboratory and human 
resources, as well as for the affected women. The 
emergence of antimicrobial resistance is of concern 
and may limit the choice of antimicrobials (125).
 Equity
 Preterm birth is the leading cause of neonatal 
death worldwide, with most deaths occurring in 
LMICs; therefore, preventing preterm birth among 
disadvantaged populations might help to address 
inequalities.
 Acceptability
 In LMICs, some women hold the belief that 
pregnancy is a healthy condition and may not accept 
the use of antibiotics in this context (particularly 
if they have no symptoms) unless they have 
experienced a previous pregnancy complication (high 
confidence in the evidence) (22). Others view ANC 
as a source of knowledge, information and medical 
safety, and generally appreciate the interventions 
and advice they are offered (high confidence in the 
evidence). However, engagement may be limited if 
this type of intervention is not explained properly. In 
addition, where there are likely to be additional costs 
associated with treatment, women are less likely to 
engage (high confidence in the evidence).
 Feasibility
 A lack of resources in LMICs, both in terms of 
the availability of the medicines and testing, 
and the lack of suitably trained staff to provide 
relevant information and perform tests, may limit 
implementation (high confidence in the evidence) 
(45).
 C.2: Antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent recurrent urinary tract infections 
(RUTI)
 RECOMMENDATION C.2: Antibiotic prophylaxis is only recommended to prevent 
recurrent urinary tract infections in pregnant women in the context of rigorous research.
 (Context-specific recommendation – research)
 Remarks
 • Further research is needed to determine the best strategies for preventing RUTI in pregnancy, including 
the effects of antibiotic prophylaxis on pregnancy-related outcomes and changes in antimicrobial 
resistance.
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
65
Summary of evidence and considerations
 Values
 Effects of prophylactic antibiotics to 
prevent RUTI compared with no antibiotics 
(EB Table C.2)
 The evidence on the effects of prophylactic antibiotics 
to prevent RUTI was derived from a Cochrane review 
in which only one trial in the USA involving 200 
pregnant women contributed data (127). Women 
admitted to hospital with pyelonephritis were 
randomized, after the acute phase, to prophylactic 
antibiotics (nitrofurantoin 50 mg three times daily) 
for the remainder of the pregnancy plus close 
surveillance (regular clinic visits and urine culture, 
with antibiotics on positive culture), or to close 
surveillance only.
 Maternal outcomes
 Evidence from this single study on the risk of 
recurrent pyelonephritis and RUTI with prophylactic 
antibiotics is very uncertain. No other maternal ANC 
guideline outcomes were reported in the study.
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Evidence on the risk of low birth weight and preterm 
birth with prophylactic antibiotics is very uncertain. 
No other fetal and neonatal ANC guideline outcomes 
were reported in the study.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 n
 Additional considerations
 n Antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent RUTI may lead to 
increased antimicrobial resistance and there is a 
lack of evidence on this potential consequence.
 See “Women’s values” at the beginning of section 
3.C: Background (p. 64).
 Resources
 Antibiotic costs vary. Trimethoprim is cheaper 
than nitrofurantoin, which can cost about US$ 5 for 
28 × 100 mg tablets (137).
 Equity
 Impact not known.
 Acceptability
 In LMICs, some women hold the belief that 
pregnancy is a healthy condition and may not accept 
the use of antibiotics in this context (particularly 
if they have no symptoms) unless they have 
experienced a previous pregnancy complication (high 
confidence in the evidence) (22). Others view ANC 
as a source of knowledge, information and medical 
safety and generally appreciate the interventions 
and advice they are offered (high confidence in the 
evidence). However, engagement may be limited if 
this type of intervention is not explained properly. In 
addition, where there are likely to be additional costs 
associated with treatment, women are less likely to 
engage (high confidence in the evidence).
 Feasibility
 A lack of resources in LMICs, both in terms of the 
availability of the medicines and testing, and the lack 
of suitably trained staff to provide relevant information 
and perform tests, may limit implementation (high 
confidence in the evidence) (45).
 C.3: Antenatal anti-D immunoglobulin prophylaxis
 RECOMMENDATION C.3: Antenatal prophylaxis with anti-D immunoglobulin in non-sensitized 
Rh-negative pregnant women at 28 and 34 weeks of gestation to prevent RhD alloimmunization 
is recommended only in the context of rigorous research. (Context-specific recommendation – 
research)
 Remarks
 • This context-specific recommendation relates to anti-D prophylaxis during pregnancy and not the 
practice of giving anti-D after childbirth, for which there is high-certainty evidence of its effect of reducing 
RhD alloimmunization in subsequent pregnancies (129). Anti-D should still be given postnatally when 
indicated.
 • Determining the prevalence of RhD alloimmunization and associated poor outcomes among women in 
LMIC settings, as well as developing strategies to manage this condition, is considered a research priority
 66
Summary of evidence and considerations
 n
 Effects of antenatal anti-D immunoglobulin 
prophylaxis in non-sensitized Rh-negative 
pregnant  women compared with no intervention 
(EB Table C.3)
 The evidence on the effects of antenatal anti-D 
prophylaxis was derived from a Cochrane review that 
included two RCTs involving over 4500 Rh-negative 
pregnant women (138). Most participants were 
primigravidas. Both trials compared antenatal anti-D 
prophylaxis with no antenatal anti-D prophylaxis. One 
trial used a dose of 500 IU, the other used 250 IU, 
given at 28 and 34 weeks of gestation. Data were 
available for 3902 pregnancies, and more than half 
the participants gave birth to Rh-positive newborns 
(2297). All women with Rh-positive newborns 
received postpartum anti-D immunoglobulin as per 
usual management. The primary outcome was the 
presence of Rh-antibodies in maternal blood (a proxy 
for neonatal morbidity). No maternal ANC guideline 
outcomes (including maternal satisfaction and side
effects) and few perinatal guideline outcomes were 
reported in these trials.
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Evidence on the effect of antenatal anti-D on RhD 
alloimmunization during pregnancy, suggesting 
little or no difference in effect, is very uncertain. In 
addition, the evidence on the effect on postpartum 
RhD alloimmunization and alloimmunization up 
to 12 months postpartum among women giving 
birth to Rh-positive newborns (n = 2297 and 2048, 
respectively) is very uncertain, partly because events 
were rare. Evidence on the effect of antenatal anti-D 
on neonatal morbidity (jaundice) from one trial (1882 
neonates) is also very uncertain, partly because 
events were rare. No other ANC guideline outcomes 
were reported in the review.
 Additional considerations
 n
 n Low-certainty evidence from the Cochrane review 
suggests that Rh-negative women who receive 
antenatal anti-D are less likely to register a 
positive Kleihauer test (which detects fetal cells 
in maternal blood) during pregnancy (1 trial, 1884 
women; RR: 0.60, 95% CI: 0.41–0.88) and at the 
birth of a Rh-positive neonate (1 trial, 1189 women; 
RR: 0.60, 95% CI: 0.46–0.79).
 n
 n In the Cochrane review, the rate of RhD alloimmuni
zation during pregnancy, the postpartum period and 
up to 12 months later among women in the control 
group was 0.6%, 1.1% and 1.5%, respectively.
 n Rates of RhD alloimmunization in subsequent 
pregnancies were not reported in the trials.
 n
 n There is no evidence on optimal dose of antenatal 
anti-D prophylaxis and various regimens are 
used. There are two ongoing studies listed in the 
Cochrane review, which may help to clarify issues 
around effects and dosage once completed.
 n
 n Only 60% of Rh-negative primigravidas will have 
an Rh-positive newborn, therefore 40% of Rh
negative women will receive anti-D unnecessarily 
with antenatal anti-D prophylaxis (138).
 Values
 See “Women’s values” at the beginning of section 
3.C: Background (p. 64).
 Resources
 A single dose of anti-D can cost around US$ 50 
(500 IU) to US$ 87 (1500 IU) (139), depending on the 
brand and local taxes; therefore, the cost of antenatal 
prophylaxis for two 500 IU doses could be as much 
as US$ 100 per woman. Additional costs will include 
screening for blood typing in settings where Rh blood 
tests are not currently performed.
 Equity
 The contribution of RhD alloimmunization to 
perinatal morbidity and mortality in various LMIC 
settings is uncertain and it is not known whether 
antenatal anti-D for non-sensitized Rh-negative 
women will impact on equity.
 Acceptability
 Anti-D immunoglobulin is derived from human 
plasma and is administered by injection, which may 
not be acceptable to all women. Qualitative evidence 
indicates that engagement may be limited if tests and 
procedures are not explained properly to women, or 
when women feel their beliefs, traditions and social 
support mechanisms are overlooked or ignored by 
health-care professionals (high confidence in the 
evidence) (22).
 Feasibility
 In a number of LMIC settings providers feel that a 
lack of resources, both in terms of the availability 
of the medicines and the lack of suitably trained 
staff to provide relevant information, may limit 
implementation of recommended interventions 
(high confidence in the evidence) (45). Anti-D needs 
refrigeration at 2–8°C, which may not be feasible in 
some LMIC settings.
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
67
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 68
 C.4: Preventive anthelminthic treatment
 RECOMMENDATION C.4: In endemic areas,a preventive anthelminthic treatment is 
recommended for pregnant women after the first trimester as part of worm infection reduction 
programmes. (Context-specific recommendation)
 Remarks
 • This recommendation is consistent with the WHO Guideline: preventive chemotherapy to control soil
transmitted helminth infections in high-risk groups (140), which states that: 
“Preventive chemotherapy (deworming), using single-dose albendazole (400 mg) or 
mebendazole (500 mg) is recommended as a public health intervention for pregnant women, 
after the first trimester, living in areas where both: (1) the baseline prevalence of hookworm 
and/or T. trichiura infection is 20% or more and (2) where anaemia is a severe public health 
problem, with prevalence of 40% or higher among pregnant women, in order to reduce the 
burden of hookworm and T. trichiura infection (conditional recommendation, moderate quality of 
evidence).”
 • Endemic areas are areas where the prevalence of hookworm and/or whipworm infection is 20% or more. 
Anaemia is considered a severe public health problem when the prevalence among pregnant women is 
40% or higher.
 • Infected pregnant women in non-endemic areas should receive anthelminthic treatment in the second 
or third trimester on a case-by-case basis (140). A single dose of albendazole (400 mg) or mebendazole 
(500 mg) should be used (140, 141).
 • The safety of these drugs in pregnancy has not been unequivocally established; however, the benefits are 
considered to outweigh the disadvantages (141, 142).
 • WHO recommends a treatment strategy comprising two treatments per year in high-risk settings with 
a prevalence of  50% for soil-transmitted helminthiasis, and once per year in areas with a 20–50% 
prevalence (140).
 • For further guidance on soil-transmitted helminth infections, refer to the WHO Guideline: preventive 
chemotherapy to control soil-transmitted helminth infections in high-risk groups (currently in press) (140).
 a Greater than 20% prevalence of infection with any soil-transmitted helminths.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of prophylactic anthelminthic treatment 
against soil-transmitted helminths administered 
in the second trimester of pregnancy compared 
with no intervention or placebo (EB Table C.4)
 The following evidence on the effects of prophylactic 
anthelminthic treatment was derived from a 
Cochrane review that included four trials conducted 
in Peru, Sierra Leone and Uganda, involving 4265 
pregnant women (142). In two trials (Peru and Sierra 
Leone), the anthelminthic medication (albendazole 
or mebendazole) was administered as a single dose 
in the second trimester, with or without daily iron and 
folic acid supplements, irrespective of the presence 
of proven helminthiasis. The frequency of anaemia 
(Hb < 110 g/L) in these two trials was 56% and 47%, 
respectively, and the frequency of intestinal worms 
ranged from 20% to 64.2% for roundworm, 46.4% 
to 65.6% for hookworm, and 74.4% to 82% for 
whipworm. One small Ugandan trial administered a 
single dose of albendazole (400 mg) or placebo to 
women in the second trimester, irrespective of the 
proven presence of helminthiasis; baseline prevalence 
was 15%, 38% and 6% for ascariasis, hookworm and 
trichuriasis, respectively. The other Ugandan RCT 
contributed data on albendazole plus ivermectin 
versus ivermectin only, administered as single doses 
to pregnant women in the second trimester; all 
women were infected with an intestinal helminth at 
trial entry.
 Maternal outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that a single dose of 
albendazole or mebendazole in the second trimester 
of pregnancy may have little or no effect on maternal 
anaemia (defined as Hb < 11 g/dL) (4 trials, 3266 
women; RR: 0.94; 95% CI: 0.81–1.10).
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that a single 
dose of albendazole or mebendazole in the second 
n
 trimester of pregnancy probably has little or no effect 
on preterm birth (2 trials, 1318 women; RR: 0.88, 95% 
CI: 0.43–1.78) or perinatal mortality (2 trials, 3385 
women; RR: 1.09, 95% CI: 0.71–1.67). No other ANC 
guideline outcomes were reported in the review.
 Additional considerations
 n
 n None of the trials in the Cochrane review evaluated 
effects of more than one dose of anthelminthics. 
Findings from large non-randomized studies 
(NRSs) suggest that prophylactic anthelminthic 
treatment may have beneficial effects for mothers 
and newborns living in endemic areas (143–145):
 n– One NRS, including approximately 5000 
pregnant women in Nepal with a 74% 
prevalence of hookworm infection, reported 
a 41% reduction in six-month infant mortality 
among women receiving two doses of 
albendazole (one each in the second and third 
trimesters) compared with no treatment (95% 
CI: 18–57%) (143). This study also showed 
reductions in severe maternal anaemia with 
albendazole.
 n– A study from Sri Lanka involving approximately 
7000 women compared mebendazole with 
no treatment and found fewer stillbirths and 
perinatal deaths among women receiving 
mebendazole (1.9% vs 3.3%; OR: 0.55, 95% 
CI: 0.40–0.77), and little difference in the 
occurrence of congenital anomalies (1.8% vs 
1.5%, for intervention and controls, respectively; 
OR: 1.24, 95% CI: 0.80–1.91), even among the 
407 women who had taken mebendazole in the 
f
 irst trimester against medical advice (145).
 n
 n The WHO manual on Preventive chemotherapy in 
human helminthiasis stresses that every opportunity 
should be taken to reach at-risk populations 
through existing channels (141).
 n
 n Cross-referencing other WHO guidelines, the 
upcoming 2016 WHO Guideline: preventive 
chemotherapy to control soil-transmitted helminth 
infections in high-risk groups recommends that a 
single dose of albendazole or mebendazole should 
be offered to pregnant women in the second and 
third trimesters of pregnancy where the prevalence 
of any soil-transmitted helminth infection 
(roundworm, hookworm and whipworm) exceeds 
20% (140).
 n Preventive helminthic treatment helps to lessen 
the burden of other infections, e.g. HIV, malaria 
and TB, and contributes to a sustained reduction of 
transmission (142).
 Values
 See “Women’s values” at the beginning of section 
3.C: Background (p. 64).
 Resources
 Preventive chemotherapy against helminthic 
infections is a cost–effective intervention. The 
market price of a single tablet of generic albendazole 
(400 mg) or mebendazole (500 mg) is about 
US$ 0.02–0.03 (141).
 Equity
 Helminthic infections are widely prevalent in poverty
stricken regions and control of this disease aims to 
alleviate suffering, reduce poverty and support equity 
(141).
 Acceptability
 Affected women are often asymptomatic and may 
not perceive the need for treatment. Therefore, the 
prevalence of soil-based helminthiasis in a particular 
setting is likely to influence women’s and providers’ 
preferences. Studies of anthelminthic programmes 
among non-pregnant cohorts, e.g. schoolchildren, in 
endemic areas have shown high levels of acceptability 
(146). For women receiving preventive treatment in 
endemic areas, worms are often visible in the stools 
the day after treatment, and this may reinforce the 
value of the intervention. However, where there 
are likely to be additional costs associated with 
treatment (high confidence in the evidence) or where 
the intervention is unavailable because of resource 
constraints (low confidence in the evidence) women 
may be less likely to engage with services (45).
 Feasibility
 In a number of LMIC settings providers feel that a 
lack of resources, both in terms of the availability 
of the medicines and the lack of suitably trained 
staff to provide relevant information, may limit 
implementation of recommended interventions (high 
confidence in the evidence) (45).
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
69
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 70
 C.5: Tetanus toxoid vaccination
 RECOMMENDATION C.5: Tetanus toxoid vaccination is recommended for all pregnant women, 
depending on previous tetanus vaccination exposure, to prevent neonatal mortality from 
tetanus. (Recommended)
 Remarks
 • This recommendation is consistent with recommendations from the 2006 WHO guideline on Maternal 
immunization against tetanus (134). The GDG endorses the 2006 guideline approach, which recommends 
the following.
 –If a pregnant woman has not previously been vaccinated, or if her immunization status is unknown, 
she should receive two doses of a tetanus toxoid-containing vaccine (TT-CV) one month apart with 
the second dose given at least two weeks before delivery. Two doses protect against tetanus infection 
for 1–3 years in most people. A third dose is recommended six months after the second dose, which 
should extend protection to at least five years.
 –Two further doses for women who are first vaccinated against tetanus during pregnancy should be 
given after the third dose, in the two subsequent years or during two subsequent pregnancies.
 –If a woman has had 1–4 doses of a TT-CV in the past, she should receive one dose of a TT-CV during 
each subsequent pregnancy to a total of five doses (five doses protects throughout the childbearing 
years).
 • Tetanus vaccination and clean delivery practices are major components of the strategy to eradicate 
maternal and neonatal tetanus globally (147).
 • Effective surveillance is critical for identifying areas or populations at high risk of neonatal tetanus and for 
monitoring the impact of interventions.
 • A monitoring system should include an immunization register, personal vaccination cards and maternal 
health records, which should be held by the woman.
 • For effective implementation, ANC health-care providers need to be trained in tetanus vaccination and 
the vaccine, equipment and supplies (refrigerator, needles and syringes) need to be readily available at 
ANC services.
 • Policy-makers in low prevalence/high-income settings may choose not to include tetanus vaccination 
among ANC interventions if effective tetanus immunization programmes and good post-exposure 
prophylaxis exist outside of pregnancy.
 • ANC contacts should be used to verify the vaccination status of pregnant women, and administer 
any vaccines that are recommended in the national immunization schedule. ANC contacts are also 
opportunities to explain the importance of infant vaccination and communicate the infant/child 
vaccination schedule to pregnant women.
 • Further information can be found in the WHO guidance (134), available at: http://www.who.int/
 reproductivehealth/publications/maternal_perinatal_health/immunization_tetanus.pdf; and in WHO’s 
vaccine position papers, available at: http://www.who.int/immunization/documents/positionpapers/en
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of antenatal tetanus toxoid (TT) 
vaccination compared with no, other or placebo 
vaccination (EB Table C.5)
 The evidence on the effects of TT vaccination was 
derived from a Cochrane review that assessed 
the effect of tetanus vaccination in women of 
reproductive age or pregnant women to prevent 
neonatal tetanus (148). Two RCTs contributed data: 
one was conducted in Colombia between 1961 and 
1965 and compared a tetanus vaccine (aluminium 
phosphate adsorbed tetanus toxoid [10LF]; 3 doses) 
with an influenza vaccine (1618 women, 1182 
neonates); the other was conducted in the USA and 
compared a combined vaccine (tetanus/diphtheria/
 acellular pertussis [Tdap]; 1 dose) with saline placebo 
in 48 pregnant women between 30 and 32 weeks of 
gestation. Due to the relative paucity of RCT data, 
additional evidence on effects is also considered in 
the “Additional considerations” section.
Maternal outcomes
 Resources
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that local side
effects, such as pain, were more common with the 
Tdap vaccination than placebo (48 women; RR: 3.94, 
95% CI: 1.41–11.01). There is no evidence on other 
maternal outcomes.
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence from the Colombian trial 
suggests that there may be fewer neonatal tetanus 
cases among neonates whose mothers receive 
TT vaccination than among those who do not (1182 
neonates; RR: 0.20, 95% CI: 0.10–0.40). Moderate
certainty evidence suggests that two or more doses 
of TT probably reduce neonatal mortality from 
any cause (1 trial, 688 neonates; RR: 0.31, 95% CI: 
0.17–0.55). Further low-certainty evidence suggests 
that neonatal mortality from tetanus may be reduced 
among neonates whose mothers receive at least two 
TT doses (1 trial, 688 neonates; RR: 0.02, 95% CI: 
0.00–0.30), but not among neonates whose mothers 
receive only one dose (1 trial, 494 neonates; RR: 0.57, 
95% CI: 0.26–1.24). Congenital anomalies and other 
ANC guideline outcomes were not reported in the 
trials.
 Additional considerations
 n
 n A systematic review that pooled data from the 
Colombian trial with that of a large cohort study 
of antenatal TT vaccination from India found 
moderate-certainty evidence to support a large 
effect (94% reduction) on neonatal tetanus deaths 
in favour of TT vaccination with at least two doses 
in pregnant women and women of childbearing 
age (2 trials, 2146 neonates; RR: 0.06, 95% CI: 
0.02–0.20) (149).
 n
 n TT vaccination has been widely used over 
40 years, leading to a substantial decrease in 
neonatal tetanus and an increase in neonatal 
survival, with no sign of possible harm to pregnant 
women or their fetuses (150). The WHO strategy 
for eliminating maternal and neonatal tetanus 
includes immunization of pregnant women, 
supplementary immunization activities in selected 
high-risk areas, promotion of clean deliveries and 
clean cord practices, and reliable neonatal tetanus 
surveillance (134).
 Values
 See “Women’s values” at the beginning of section 
3.C: Background (p. 64).
 The cost of three doses of TT vaccine has been 
estimated at around US$ 3 per woman (151), although 
lower costs in vaccination programmes have been 
reported (152). The need for cold-chain equipment 
and staff training may add to costs.
 Equity
 Most deaths from neonatal tetanus occur in countries 
with low coverage of facility-based births, ANC and 
tetanus vaccination (149). In addition, in LMICs, 
ANC coverage and infant mortality is often unequal 
between the most- and least-educated, urban and 
rural, and richest and poorest populations (29). 
Therefore, increasing tetanus immunity in LMICs 
and among disadvantaged populations could help to 
address inequalities.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence indicates that most women 
view ANC as a source of knowledge, information 
and medical safety, and generally appreciate the 
interventions and advice they are offered. However, 
engagement may be limited if vaccinations are 
not explained properly or when women feel their 
beliefs, traditions and social support mechanisms are 
overlooked or ignored by health-care professionals 
(high confidence in the evidence) (22). Lack of 
engagement may be compounded if services are 
delivered in a hurried, inflexible, didactic manner 
(high confidence in the evidence).
 Feasibility
 Antenatal services provide a convenient opportunity 
for vaccinating pregnant women, particularly in 
settings without effective childhood immunization 
programmes. Qualitative evidence indicates that if 
there are additional costs associated with vaccination 
(including transport costs and loss of earnings), 
uptake may be limited (high confidence in the 
evidence) (22). In addition, ANC providers in many 
LMIC settings feel that a lack of resources, both in 
terms of the availability of vaccines and the lack of 
suitably trained staff, may limit implementation (high 
confidence in the evidence) (45).
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
71
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 72
 C.6: Intermittent preventive treatment of malaria in pregnancy (IPTp)
 RECOMMENDATION C.6: In malaria-endemic areas in Africa, intermittent preventive treatment 
with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (IPTp-SP) is recommended for all pregnant women. Dosing 
should start in the second trimester, and doses should be given at least one month apart, with 
the objective of ensuring that at least three doses are received. (Context-specific recommendation)
 Remarks
 • This recommendation has been integrated from the WHO Guidelines for the treatment of malaria (2015), 
where it is considered to be a strong recommendation based on high-quality evidence (153).
 • Malaria infection during pregnancy is a major public health problem, with substantial risks for the mother, 
her fetus and the newborn. WHO recommends a package of interventions for preventing and controlling 
malaria during pregnancy, which includes promotion and use of insecticide-treated nets, appropriate 
case management with prompt, effective treatment, and, in areas with moderate to high transmission of 
Plasmodium falciparum, administration of IPTp-SP (153).
 • The high-quality evidence supporting this recommendation was derived from a systematic review 
of seven RCTs conducted in malaria-endemic countries, which shows that three or more doses of 
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) is associated with reduced maternal parasitaemia, fewer low-birth
weight infants and increased mean birth weight compared with two doses only (154).
 • The malaria GDG noted that most evidence was derived from women in their first and second pregnancies; 
however, the limited evidence on IPTp-SP from women in their third and subsequent pregnancies was 
consistent with benefit (153).
 • To ensure that pregnant women in endemic areas start IPTp-SP as early as possible in the second 
trimester, policy-makers should ensure health system contact with women at 13 weeks of gestation. 
Policy-makers could also consider supplying women with their first SP dose at the first ANC visit with 
instructions about the date (corresponding to 13 weeks of gestation) on which the medicine should be 
taken.
 • SP acts by interfering with folic acid synthesis in the malaria parasite, thereby inhibiting its life-cycle. 
There is some evidence that high doses of supplemented folic acid (i.e. 5 mg daily or more) may interfere 
with the efficacy of SP in pregnancy (155). Countries should ensure that they procure and distribute folic 
acid supplements for antenatal use at the recommended antenatal dosage (i.e. 0.4 mg daily).
 • The malaria GDG noted that there is insufficient evidence on the safety, efficacy and pharmacokinetics of 
most antimalarial agents in pregnancy, particularly during the first trimester (153).
 • Detailed evidence and guidance related to the recommendation can be found in the 2015 guidelines (153), 
available at: http://www.who.int/malaria/publications/atoz/9789241549127/en/
C.7: Pre-exposure prophylaxis for HIV prevention
 RECOMMENDATION C.7: Oral pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) containing tenofovir disoproxil 
fumarate (TDF) should be offered as an additional prevention choice for pregnant women at 
substantial risk of HIV infection as part of combination prevention approaches.
 (Context-specific recommendation)
 Remarks
 • This recommendation has been integrated from the WHO guideline on when to start antiretroviral therapy 
and on pre-exposure prophylaxis for HIV (2015), where it is considered to be a strong recommendation 
based on high-quality evidence (99). The evidence and further guidance related to the recommendation 
can be found in this guideline.
 • “Substantial risk” is provisionally defined as HIV incidence greater than 3 per 100 person-years in the 
absence of PrEP, but individual risk varies within this group depending on individual behaviour and 
the characteristics of sexual partners. Local epidemiological evidence concerning risk factors and HIV 
incidence should be used to inform implementation.
 • Thresholds for offering PrEP may vary depending on a variety of considerations, including resources, 
feasibility and demand.
 • The level of protection is strongly correlated with adherence.
 • Detailed evidence and guidance related to this recommendation can be found in the 2015 guideline (99), 
available at: http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/guidelines/earlyrelease-arv/en/
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
73
D. Interventions for common 
physiological symptoms
 Background
 Women’s bodies undergo substantial changes 
during pregnancy, which are brought about by both 
hormonal and mechanical effects. These changes lead 
to a variety of common symptoms – including nausea 
and vomiting, low back and pelvic pain, heartburn, 
varicose veins, constipation and leg cramps – that in 
some women cause severe discomfort and negatively 
affects their pregnancy experience. In general, 
symptoms associated with mechanical effects, e.g. 
pelvic pain, heartburn and varicose veins, often 
worsen as pregnancy progresses.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 Symptoms of nausea and vomiting are experienced 
by approximately 70% of pregnant women and 
usually occur in the first trimester of pregnancy 
(156); however, approximately 20% of women may 
experience nausea and vomiting beyond 20 weeks of 
gestation (157). Low back and pelvic pain is estimated 
to occur in half of pregnant women, 8% of whom 
experience severe disability (158). Symptoms of 
heartburn occur in two thirds of pregnant women, 
and may be worse after eating and lying down (159). 
Varicose veins usually occur in the legs, but can also 
occur in the vulva and rectum, and may be associated 
with pain, night cramps, aching and heaviness, 
and worsen with long periods of standing (160). 
Constipation can be very troublesome and may be 
complicated by haemorrhoids (161). Leg cramps often 
occur at night and can be very painful, affecting sleep 
and daily activities (162). Suggested approaches to 
manage common physiological symptoms include a 
variety of non-pharmacological and pharmacological 
options and the GDG considered the evidence and 
other relevant information on these approaches.
 Women’s values:
 A scoping review of what women want from ANC 
and what outcomes they value informed the ANC 
guideline (13). Evidence showed that women from 
high-, medium- and low-resource settings valued 
having a positive pregnancy experience. This 
included woman-centred advice and treatment for 
common physiological symptoms (high confidence 
in the evidence). In many LMICs, this also included 
support and respect for women’s use of alternative 
or traditional approaches to the diagnosis and 
treatment of common pregnancy-related symptoms 
(moderate confidence in the evidence).
 D.1: Interventions for nausea and vomiting
 RECOMMENDATION D.1: Ginger, chamomile, vitamin B6 and/or acupuncture are recommended 
for the relief of nausea in early pregnancy, based on a woman’s preferences and available 
options. (Recommended)
 Remarks
 • In the absence of stronger evidence, the GDG agreed that these non-pharmacological options are unlikely 
to have harmful effects on mother and baby.
 • Women should be informed that symptoms of nausea and vomiting usually resolve in the second half of 
pregnancy.
 • Pharmacological treatments for nausea and vomiting, such as doxylamine and metoclopramide, should 
be reserved for those pregnant women experiencing distressing symptoms that are not relieved by non
pharmacological options, under the supervision of a medical doctor.
 74
Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of interventions for nausea and 
vomiting compared with other, no or placebo 
interventions (EB Table D.1)
 The evidence on the effects of various interventions 
for nausea and vomiting in pregnancy was derived 
from a Cochrane systematic review (157). The 
review included 41 trials involving 5449 women in 
whom a wide variety of pharmacological and non
pharmacological interventions were evaluated. 
Trials were conducted in a variety of HICs and 
LMICs, and most included pregnant women at less 
than 16 weeks of gestation with mild to moderate 
nausea and vomiting. Alternative therapies and 
non-pharmacological agents evaluated included 
acupuncture, acupressure, vitamin B6, ginger, 
chamomile, mint oil and lemon oil. Pharmacological 
agents included antihistamines, phenothiazines, 
dopamine-receptor antagonists and serotonin 5-HT3 
receptor antagonists. Due to heterogeneity among 
the types of interventions and reporting of outcomes, 
reviewers were seldom able to pool data. The primary 
outcome of all interventions was maternal relief 
from symptoms (usually measured using the Rhodes 
Index), and perinatal outcomes relevant to this 
guideline were rarely reported.
 Non-pharmacological agents versus placebo or no 
treatment
 Ten trials evaluated non-pharmacological 
interventions including ginger (prepared as syrup, 
capsules or powder within biscuits) (7 trials from 
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Pakistan, Thailand 
and the USA involving 578 participants), lemon oil 
(one Iranian study, 100 participants), mint oil (one 
Iranian study, 60 participants), chamomile (one 
Iranian study, 105 participants), and vitamin B6 
interventions (two studies in Thailand and the USA; 
416 participants) compared with no treatment or 
placebo.
 Ginger: Low-certainty evidence from several small 
individual studies suggests that ginger may relieve 
symptoms of nausea and vomiting. A study from 
Pakistan found that ginger reduced nausea symptom 
scores (68 women; MD: 1.38 lower on day 3, 95% 
CI: 0.03–2.73 lower), and vomiting symptom scores 
(64 women; MD: 1.14 lower, 95% CI: 0.37–1.91 lower), 
and an Iranian study showed improvements in nausea 
and vomiting symptom scores on day 7 in women 
taking ginger supplements compared with placebo 
(95 women; MD: 4.19 lower, 95% CI: 1.73–6.65 
lower). Data from the studies in Thailand and the 
USA showed a similar direction of effect on nausea 
symptoms in favour of ginger.
 Lemon oil: Low-certainty evidence from one small 
Iranian study suggests that lemon oil may make little 
or no difference to nausea and vomiting symptom 
scores (100 women; MD: 0.46 lower on day 3, 
95% CI: 1.27 lower to 0.35 higher), or to maternal 
satisfaction (the number of women satisfied with 
treatment) (1 trial, 100 women; RR: 1.47, 95% CI: 
0.91–2.37).
 Mint oil: The evidence on mint oil’s ability to relieve 
symptoms of nausea and vomiting is of very low 
certainty.
 Chamomile: Low-certainty evidence from one small 
study suggests that chamomile may reduce nausea 
and vomiting symptoms scores (70 women; MD: 5.74 
lower, 95% CI: 3.17–8.31 lower).
 Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine): Moderate-certainty 
evidence from two trials (one used 25 mg oral vitamin 
B6 8-hourly for 3 days, the other used 10 mg oral 
vitamin B6 8-hourly for 5 days) shows that vitamin 
B6 probably reduces nausea symptoms scores 
(388 women, trials measured the change in nausea 
scores from baseline to day 3; MD: 0.92 higher score 
change, 95% 0.4–1.44 higher), but low-certainty 
evidence suggests that it may have little or no effect 
on vomiting (2 trials, 392 women; RR: 0.76, 95% CI: 
0.35–1.66).
 Acupuncture and acupressure versus placebo or no 
treatment
 Five studies (601 participants) evaluated P6 (inner 
forearm) acupressure versus placebo, one Thai study 
(91 participants) evaluated auricular acupressure 
(round magnetic balls used as ear pellets) versus no 
treatment, one study in the USA (230 participants) 
evaluated P6 acustimulation therapy (nerve 
stimulation at the P6 acupuncture point) versus 
placebo, and a four-arm Australian study (593 
women) evaluated traditional Chinese acupuncture or 
P6 acupuncture versus P6 placebo acupuncture or no 
intervention.
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that P6 acupressure 
may reduce nausea symptom scores (100 women; 
MD: 1.7 lower, 95% CI: 0.99–2.41 lower) and reduce 
the number of vomiting episodes (MD: 0.9 lower, 
95% CI: 0.74–1.06 lower). Low-certainty evidence 
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
75
suggests that auricular acupressure may also reduce 
nausea symptom scores (91 women; MD: 3.6 lower, 
95% CI: 0.58–6.62 lower), as may traditional Chinese 
acupuncture (296 women; MD: 0.7 lower, 95% CI: 
0.04–1.36 lower). Low-certainty evidence suggests 
that P6 acupuncture may make little or no difference 
to mean nausea scores compared with P6 placebo 
acupuncture (296 women; MD: 0.3 lower, 95% CI: 
1.0 lower to 0.4 higher).
 Pharmacological agents versus placebo
 One study evaluated an antihistamine (doxylamine) 
and another evaluated a dopamine-receptor 
antagonist (metoclopramide). Certain other drugs 
evaluated in the review (hydroxyzine, thiethylperazine 
and fluphenazine) are from old studies and these 
drugs are no longer used in pregnant women due to 
safety concerns.
 Moderate-certainty evidence suggests that 
doxylamine plus vitamin B6 probably reduces nausea 
and vomiting symptom scores compared with 
placebo (1 study, 256 women; MD: 0.9 lower on day 
15, 95% CI: 0.25–1.55 lower). Low-certainty evidence 
from this study suggests that there may be little or no 
difference in headache (256 women; RR: 0.81, 95% 
CI: 0.45–1.48) or drowsiness (256 women; RR: 1.21, 
95% CI: 0.64–2.27) between doxylamine plus vitamin 
B6 and placebo.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 76
 Low-certainty evidence on metoclopramide (10 mg) 
suggests that this agent may reduce nausea symptom 
scores (1 trial, 68 women; MD: 2.94 lower on day 3, 
95% CI: 1.33–4.55 lower). There was no side-effect 
data on metoclopramide in the review.
 No studies compared ondansetron (a 5HT3 receptor 
antagonist) with placebo. Two small studies 
compared ondansetron with metoclopramide and 
doxylamine, respectively, but evidence on relative 
effects was uncertain.
 Additional considerations
 n
 n Low-certainty evidence from single studies 
comparing different non-pharmacological 
interventions with each other – namely 
acupuncture plus vitamin B6 versus P6 
acupuncture plus placebo (66 participants), 
traditional acupuncture and P6 acupuncture 
(296 participants), ginger versus chamomile 
(70 participants), P6 acupuncture versus ginger 
(98 participants), and ginger versus vitamin B6 
(123 participants) – suggests there may be little 
or no difference in effects on relief of nausea 
symptoms.
 n
 n Low-certainty evidence suggests that there may 
be little or no difference between ginger and 
metoclopramide on nausea symptom scores 
(1 trial, 68 women; MD: 1.56 higher, 95% 0.22 
lower to 3.34 higher) or vomiting symptom scores 
(68 women; MD: 0.33 higher, 95% CI: 0.69 lower 
to 1.35 higher) on day 3 after the intervention.
 n
 n Side-effects and safety of pharmacological agents 
were poorly reported in the included studies. 
However, drowsiness is a common side-effect of 
various antihistamines used to treat nausea and 
vomiting.
 n
 n Metoclopramide is generally not recommended 
in the first trimester of pregnancy, but is widely 
used (163). A study of over 81 700 singleton 
births in Israel reported that they found no 
statistically significant differences in the risk of 
major congenital malformations, low birth weight, 
preterm birth or perinatal death between neonates 
exposed (3458 neonates) and not exposed to 
metoclopramide in the first trimester of gestation.
 Values
 See “Women’s values” at the beginning of section 
3.D: Background (p. 74).
 Resources
 Costs associated with non-pharmacological remedies 
vary. Acupuncture requires professional training and 
skills and is probably associated with higher costs. 
Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine hydrochloride tablets) could 
cost about US$ 2.50 for 90 × 10 mg tablets (74).
 Equity
 The impact on equity is not known.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence from a range of LMICs 
suggests that women may be more likely to turn to 
traditional healers, herbal remedies or traditional 
birth attendants (TBAs) to treat these symptoms 
(moderate confidence in the evidence) (22). In 
addition, evidence from a diverse range of settings 
indicates that while women generally appreciate 
the interventions and information provided during 
antenatal visits, they are less likely to engage with 
services if their beliefs, traditions and socioeconomic 
circumstances are ignored or overlooked by health
care providers and/or policy-makers (high confidence 
Feasibility
 in the evidence). This may be particularly pertinent 
for acupuncture or acupressure, which may be 
culturally alien and/or poorly understood in certain 
contexts. 
D.2: Interventions for heartburn
 A lack of suitably trained staff may limit feasibility 
of certain interventions (high confidence in the 
evidence) (45).
 RECOMMENDATION D.2: Advice on diet and lifestyle is recommended to prevent and relieve 
heartburn in pregnancy. Antacid preparations can be offered to women with troublesome 
symptoms that are not relieved by lifestyle modification. (Recommended)
 Remarks
 • Lifestyle advice to prevent and relieve symptoms of heartburn includes avoidance of large, fatty meals and 
alcohol, cessation of smoking, and raising the head of the bed to sleep.
 • The GDG agreed that antacids, such as magnesium carbonate and aluminium hydroxide preparations, are 
probably unlikely to cause harm in recommended dosages.
 • There is no evidence that preparations containing more than one antacid are better than simpler 
preparations.
 • Antacids may impair absorption of other drugs (164), and therefore should not be taken within two hours 
of iron and folic acid supplements.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of interventions for heartburn compared 
with other, no or placebo interventions (EB 
Table D.2)
 The evidence on the effects of various interventions for 
heartburn in pregnancy comes from a Cochrane review 
that included nine trials involving 725 pregnant women 
with heartburn; however, only four trials (358 women) 
contributed data (159). One of these, from the 1960s, 
evaluated intramuscular prostigmine, which is no 
longer used, therefore these data were not considered 
for the guideline. The three remaining studies 
conducted in Brazil, Italy and the USA evaluated 
a magnesium hydroxide–aluminium hydroxide
simeticone complex versus placebo (156 women), 
sucrulfate (aluminium hydroxide and sulfated sucrose) 
versus advice on diet and lifestyle changes (66 
women), and acupuncture versus no treatment (36 
women). Evidence on symptom relief was generally 
assessed to be of low to very low certainty and no 
perinatal outcomes relevant to this guideline were 
reported. Evidence on side-effects for all comparisons 
was assessed as being of very low certainty.
 Pharmacological interventions versus placebo
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that complete 
relief from heartburn may occur more frequently 
with magnesium hydroxide–aluminium hydroxide
simethicone liquid and tablets than placebo (156 
women; RR: 2.04, 95% CI: 1.44–2.89).
 Pharmacological interventions versus advice on diet 
and lifestyle changes
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that complete 
relief from heartburn may occur more frequently 
with sucralfate than with advice on diet and lifestyle 
changes (65 women; RR: 2.41, 95% CI: 1.42–4.07).
 Acupuncture versus no treatment
 Data on relief of heartburn was not available in the 
review for this comparison. Low-certainty evidence 
suggests that weekly acupuncture in pregnant 
women with heartburn may improve the ability to 
sleep (36 women; RR: 2.80, 95% CI: 1.14–6.86) and 
eat (36 women; RR: 2.40, 95% CI: 1.11–5.18), a proxy 
outcome for maternal satisfaction.
 Additional considerations
 n
 n Heartburn during pregnancy is a common problem 
that can be self-treated with over-the-counter 
products containing antacids such as magnesium 
carbonate, aluminium hydroxide or calcium 
carbonate.
 n
 n The Cochrane review found no evidence on 
prescription drugs for heartburn, such as 
omeprazole and ranitidine, which are not known to 
be harmful in pregnancy (159).
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
77
Values
 See “Women’s values” at the beginning of section 
3.D: Background (p. 74).
 Resources
 Costs of antacids vary widely, but generic products 
can be relatively low cost. Acupuncture requires 
professional training and skills and is likely to be 
associated with higher costs.
 Equity
 The prevalence of health-seeking behaviour and 
treatment for heartburn in pregnancy may be unequal 
among advantaged and disadvantaged women. 
However, it is not known whether interventions to 
relieve heartburn might impact inequalities.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence from a range of LMICs suggests 
that women may be more likely to turn to traditional 
healers, herbal remedies or TBAs to treat these 
symptoms (moderate confidence in the evidence) 
D.3: Interventions for leg cramps
 (22). In addition, evidence from a diverse range 
of settings indicates that while women generally 
appreciate the interventions and information 
provided during antenatal visits, they are less likely 
to engage with services if their beliefs, traditions 
and socioeconomic circumstances are ignored or 
overlooked by health-care providers and/or policy
makers (high confidence in the evidence). This may 
be particularly pertinent for an intervention like 
acupuncture, which may be culturally alien and/
 or poorly understood in certain contexts. Indirect 
evidence also indicates that women welcome the 
pregnancy-related advice and guidance given by 
health-care professionals during antenatal visits, 
so may respond to lifestyle suggestions favourably 
(moderate confidence in the evidence).
 Feasibility
 Qualitative evidence suggests that a lack of resources 
may limit the offer of treatment for this condition 
(high confidence in the evidence) (45).
 RECOMMENDATION D.3: Magnesium, calcium or non-pharmacological treatment options can 
be used for the relief of leg cramps in pregnancy, based on a woman’s preferences and available 
options. (Recommended)
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 78
 Remarks
 • The review found no evidence on the effect of non-pharmacological therapies, such as muscle stretching, 
relaxation, heat therapy, dorsiflexion of the foot and massage.
 • The evidence on magnesium and calcium is generally of low certainty. However, the GDG agreed that 
they are unlikely to be harmful in the dose schedules evaluated in included studies.
 • Further research into the etiology and prevalence of leg cramps in pregnancy, and the role (if any) of 
magnesium and calcium in symptom relief, is needed.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of interventions for leg cramps compared 
with other, no or placebo interventions (EB 
Table D.3)
 The evidence on the effects of various interventions 
for leg cramps in pregnancy is derived from a 
Cochrane review that included six small trials 
involving 390 pregnant women with leg cramps (162). 
Three studies from Norway (42 women), Sweden 
(69 women) and Thailand (86 women) contributed 
data on oral magnesium compared with placebo. 
One study from Sweden (43 women) compared oral 
calcium with no treatment; a study conducted in the 
Islamic Republic of Iran (42 women) compared oral 
vitamins B6 and B1 with no treatment; and another 
conducted in Sweden compared oral calcium with 
vitamin C (30 women). Symptom relief, measured 
in different ways, was the primary outcome in these 
studies, and other maternal and perinatal outcomes 
relevant to this guideline were not reported.
 Oral magnesium versus placebo
 In three small studies, women in the intervention 
group were given 300–360 mg magnesium per day 
in two or three divided doses. Studies measured 
persistence or occurrence of leg cramps in different 
ways, so results could not be pooled. Moderate
Values
 certainty evidence from the Thai study suggests 
that women receiving magnesium are more likely 
to experience a 50% reduction in the number of 
leg cramps (1 trial, 86 women; RR: 1.42, 95% CI: 
1.09–1.86). The same direction of effect was found in 
the Swedish study, which reported the outcome “no 
leg cramps” after treatment, but the evidence was 
of low certainty (1 trial, 69 women; RR: 5.66, 95% 
CI: 1.35–23.68). Low-certainty evidence suggests 
that oral magnesium has little or no effect on the 
occurrence of potential side-effects, including nausea, 
diarrhoea, flatulence and bloating. Evidence from the 
third study was judged to be very uncertain.
 Oral calcium versus no treatment
 Calcium, 1 g twice daily for two weeks, was compared 
with no treatment in one small study. Low-certainty 
evidence suggests that women receiving calcium 
treatment are more likely to experience no leg cramps 
after treatment (43 women; RR: 8.59, 95% CI: 
1.19–62.07).
 Oral calcium versus vitamin C
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that there may be 
little or no difference between calcium and vitamin C 
in the effect (if any) on complete symptom relief from 
leg cramps (RR: 1.33, 95% CI: 0.53–3.38).
 Oral vitamin B1 and B6 versus no treatment
 One study evaluated this comparison, with 21 women 
receiving vitamin B1 (100 mg) plus B6 (40 mg) once 
daily for two weeks and 21 women receiving no 
treatment; however, the low-certainty findings are 
contradictory and difficult to interpret.
 Additional considerations
 n
 n The review found no evidence on non
pharmacological therapies, such as muscle 
stretching, massage, relaxation, heat therapy and 
dorsiflexion of the foot.
 See “Women’s values” at the beginning of section 
3.D: Background (p. 74).
 Resources
 Magnesium and calcium supplements are 
relatively low-cost interventions, particularly when 
administered for limited periods of two to four weeks.
 Equity
 The potential etiology of leg cramps being related 
to a nutritional deficiency (magnesium) suggests 
that the prevalence of leg cramps might be 
higher in disadvantaged populations. In theory, 
therefore, nutritional interventions may have equity 
implications, but evidence is needed.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence from a diverse range of 
settings suggests that women generally appreciate 
the pregnancy-related advice given by health
care professionals during ANC, so may respond 
to supplement suggestions favourably (moderate 
confidence in the evidence) (22). Evidence from 
some LMICs suggests that women hold the belief 
that pregnancy is a healthy condition and may turn 
to traditional healers and/or herbal remedies to treat 
these kinds of associated symptoms (high confidence 
in the evidence).
 Feasibility
 Qualitative evidence suggests that a lack of resources 
may limit the offer of treatment for this condition 
(high confidence in the evidence) (45). In addition, 
where there are additional costs for pregnant women 
associated with treatment, women are less likely to 
use it.
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
79
D.4: Interventions for low back and pelvic pain
 RECOMMENDATION D.4: Regular exercise throughout pregnancy is recommended to prevent 
low back and pelvic pain. There are a number of different treatment options that can be used, 
such as physiotherapy, support belts and acupuncture, based on a woman’s preferences and 
available options. (Recommended)
 Remarks
 • Exercise to prevent low back and pelvic pain in pregnancy can take place on land or in water. While 
exercise may also be helpful to relieve low back pain, it could exacerbate pelvic pain associated with 
symphysis pubis dysfunction and is not recommended for this condition.
 • Regular exercise is a key component of lifestyle interventions, which are recommended for pregnant 
women as part of ANC to prevent excessive weight gain in pregnancy (see Recommendation A.9).
 • Pregnant women with low back and/or pelvic pain should be informed that symptoms usually improve in 
the months after birth.
 • Women should be informed that it is unclear whether there are side-effects to alternative treatment 
options due to a paucity of data.
 • Standardized reporting of outcomes is needed for future research on treatment for low back and/or pelvic 
pain in pregnancy.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of interventions for low back and pelvic 
pain compared with other, no or placebo 
interventions (EB Table D.4)
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 80
 The evidence on the effects of various interventions 
for low back and pelvic pain in pregnancy was derived 
from a Cochrane review that included 34 trials 
involving 5121 women (165). The definitions and 
terminology of low back and pelvic pain varied such 
that in 15 trials the interventions were aimed at 
reducing low back pain, in six trials interventions were 
for pelvic pain, and in 13 trials the interventions were 
for low back and pelvic pain. Most trials evaluated 
treatment; however, six trials evaluated prevention. 
Few trials contributed data to analyses and several 
individual study findings were described only in 
narrative. Main outcomes were relief of symptoms 
and functional disability, and perinatal outcomes 
relevant to this guideline were not reported.
 Comparisons included:
 1. 
any exercise (plus standard care) versus 
standard care
 2. acupuncture (plus standard care) versus sham 
acupuncture (plus standard care)
 3. acupuncture (plus standard care) versus 
individualized physiotherapy (plus standard care)
 4. osteopathic manipulation (plus standard care) 
versus standard care
 5. one type of support belt versus another typee
 6. multimodal interventions versus standard care.
 Any exercise (plus standard care) versus standard 
care
 Seven trials (645 women) contributed data to this 
comparison for low back pain. Trials were conducted 
in Brazil, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Norway, South 
Africa and Thailand. Exercise interventions varied 
from individually supervised exercise to group 
exercise, including yoga and aqua-aerobics, and 
some included education via CDs and booklets. 
Interventions ran for 8–12 weeks and the presence 
or intensity of pain was assessed in most trials using 
visual analogue scales. However, the evidence on 
symptom relief from a meta-analysis of these seven 
studies is very uncertain. Low-certainty evidence 
suggests that functional disability scores are better 
with exercise interventions for low back pain (2 trials, 
146 women; standardized MD: 0.56 lower, 95% 
CI: 0.23–0.89 lower). Evidence on pain intensity 
(symptom scores) for low back pain was assessed  
as very uncertain.
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that an 8- to 
12-week exercise programme may reduce low 
back and pelvic pain compared with standard care 
(4 trials, 1176 women; RR: 0.66, 95% CI: 0.45–0.97) 
and moderate-certainty evidence shows that 
healthy pregnant women taking part in an exercise 
programme are probably less likely to take sick leave 
related to low back and pelvic pain (2 trials, 1062 
women; RR: 0.76; 95% CI: 0.62–0.94).
Acupuncture (plus standard care) versus sham 
acupuncture (plus standard care)
 Four small studies conducted in Sweden and the USA 
evaluated the effects of acupuncture plus standard 
care versus sham acupuncture plus standard care. 
However, little data were extracted from these studies 
and data could not be pooled. Low-certainty evidence 
from one study suggests that acupuncture may 
relieve low back and pelvic pain (72 women; RR: 4.16, 
95% CI: 1.77–9.78). Evidence from other studies was 
variously reported and very uncertain.
 Acupuncture (plus standard care) versus 
individualized physiotherapy (plus standard care)
 One small study conducted in Sweden involving 46 
women with low back and pelvic pain evaluated this 
comparison. Women’s satisfaction with treatment 
was the main outcome, but the evidence was 
assessed as very uncertain.
 Osteopathic manipulation therapy (OMT) (plus 
standard care) versus no osteopathic manipulation 
(standard care)
 Three studies evaluated OMT; however, data could 
not be pooled and the evidence from individual 
studies is inconsistent. The largest study involving 
400 women compared OMT plus standard care with 
placebo ultrasound plus standard care, or standard 
care only. Limited data from this study suggests that 
OMT may relieve low back pain symptoms more 
than standard care, and may lead to lower functional 
disability scores, but may not be better than placebo 
ultrasound for these outcomes.
 One type of support belt versus another type
 One small study conducted in Australia compared 
two types of support belts in womewith low back 
pain, the BellyBra® and Tubigrip® (N = 94) and the 
evidence from this study was assessed as very low
certainty evidence.
 Multimodal interventions versus standard care
 One study in the USA reported the effect of a 
multimodal intervention that included weekly manual 
therapy by a chiropractic specialist, combined with daily 
exercise at home, and education versus standard care 
(rest, exercise, heat pads and analgesics) on low back 
and pelvic pain. Moderate-certainty evidence suggests 
that the multimodal intervention is probably associated 
with better pain scores (1 study, 169 women; MD: 2.70 
lower, 95% CI: 1.86–3.54 lower) and better functional 
disability scores (MD: 1.40 lower; 95% CI: 0.71–2.09 
lower) compared with standard care.
 n
 Additional considerations
 n It is not clear whether the evidence on exercise 
interventions applies equally to low back pain and 
pelvic pain, or equally to prevention and treatment, 
as data from studies of prevention and treatment 
were pooled. Evidence from two studies on the 
effect of exercise plus education suggests that 
such interventions may have little or no effect on 
preventing pelvic pain (RR: 0.97; 95% CI: 0.77
1.23).
 n
 n Very low-certainty evidence on a number of other 
interventions, such as transcutaneous electrical 
nerve stimulation (TENS), progressive muscle 
relaxation with music, craniosacral therapy, and 
acetaminophen (paracetamol) – which were 
evaluated in single small trials with apparent relief 
of symptoms relative to standard care – was also 
presented in the review.
 n
 n Standard care of low back and pelvic pain 
symptoms usually comprises rest, hot or cold 
compresses, and paracetamol analgesia.
 n
 n There is a paucity of evidence on potential side
effects of alternative therapies, e.g. chiropractic 
and osteopathic manipulation, and further high
quality research is needed to establish whether 
these therapies are beneficial for low back and/or 
pelvic pain and safe during pregnancy.
 n
 n Exercise in pregnancy has been shown to have 
other benefits for pregnant women, including 
reducing excessive gestational weight gain (see 
Recommendation A.9).
 Values
 See “Women’s values” at the beginning of section 
3.D: Background (p. 74).
 Resources
 Exercise can be administered in a group setting 
and individually at home; therefore, the cost of 
exercise interventions varies. Support belts are 
available commercially from under US$ 10 per item.5  
Physiotherapy and acupuncture require specialist 
training and are therefore likely to be more resource 
intensive.
 Equity
 Improving access to low back and pelvic pain 
interventions may reduce inequalities by reducing 
functional disability and sick leave related to low back 
and pelvic pain among disadvantaged women.
 5 Based on Internet search.
 Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
81
Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence from a diverse range of settings, 
indicates that while women generally appreciate 
the interventions and information provided during 
antenatal visits, they are less likely to engage with 
services if their beliefs, traditions and socioeconomic 
circumstances are ignored or overlooked by health
care providers and/or policy-makers (high confidence 
in the evidence) (22). This may be particularly 
pertinent for an intervention like acupuncture, which 
D.5: Interventions for constipation
 may be culturally alien and/or poorly understood in 
certain contexts. In addition, where there are likely to 
be additional costs associated with treatment or where 
the treatment may be unavailable (because of resource 
constraints), women are less likely to engage with 
health services (high confidence in the evidence).
 Feasibility
 A lack of resources may limit the offer of treatment for 
this condition (high confidence in the evidence) (45).
 RECOMMENDATION D.5: Wheat bran or other fibre supplements can be used to relieve 
constipation in pregnancy if the condition fails to respond to dietary modification, based 
on a woman’s preferences and available options. (Recommended)
 Remarks
 • Dietary advice to reduce constipation during pregnancy should include promoting adequate intake of 
water and dietary fibre (found in vegetables, nuts, fruit and whole grains).
 • For women with troublesome constipation that is not relieved by dietary modification or fibre 
supplementation, stakeholders may wish to consider intermittent use of poorly absorbed laxatives.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 82
 Effects of interventions for constipation 
compared with other, no or placebo 
interventions (EB Table D.5)
 The evidence on the effects of various interventions 
for constipation in pregnancy was derived from 
a Cochrane review to which only two small RCTs 
involving 180 women contributed data (161). Both 
studies were conducted in the United Kingdom 
among pregnant women with constipation. One 
compared fibre supplementation with no intervention 
(40 women), the other compared stimulant laxatives 
with bulk-forming laxatives (140 women). No 
perinatal outcomes relevant to this guideline were 
reported.
 Fibre supplementation versus no intervention
 Evidence from the small study evaluating fibre 
supplementation versus no intervention on 
constipation relief (reported as mean frequency of 
stools) was assessed as being very uncertain.
 Stimulant laxatives versus bulk-forming laxatives
 Two stimulant laxatives were used in this 1970s study, 
senna and Normax®. The latter (containing dantron) 
is potentially carcinogenic and now only used in 
terminally ill people; however, data on stimulant 
laxatives were not available separately for senna. 
Evidence on relative symptom relief, side-effects 
(abdominal discomfort, diarrhoea), and maternal 
satisfaction for stimulant laxatives versus bulk
forming laxatives (sterculia with or without frangula) 
was assessed as being very uncertain.
 n
 Additional considerations
 n Various bulk-forming (wheat bran or oat bran 
f
 ibre supplements, sterculia, methylcellulose, 
ispaghula husk), osmotic (lactulose) and stimulant 
laxatives (senna) are available as over-the-counter 
medications for constipation and are not known to 
be harmful in pregnancy (166).
 n
 n The absorption of vitamins and mineral 
supplements could potentially be compromised by 
laxatives.
 Values
 See “Women’s values” at the beginning of section 
3.D: Background (p. 74).
 Resources
 Costs will vary according to the intervention and 
region. Cereal fibre supplements can be relatively low
cost at around US$ 1.5 per 375 g bag of wheat bran.6
 6 Based on Internet search.
Equity
 It is not known whether interventions to relieve 
constipation might impact inequalities.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence from a range of LMICs suggests 
that women may be more likely to turn to traditional 
healers, herbal remedies or TBAs to treat these 
symptoms (moderate confidence in the evidence) 
(22). Evidence from a diverse range of settings 
indicates that while women generally appreciate 
the interventions and information provided during 
antenatal visits, they are less likely to engage with 
services if their beliefs, traditions and socioeconomic 
circumstances are ignored or overlooked by health
care providers and/or policy-makers (high confidence 
in the evidence).
 Feasibility
 Other qualitative evidence suggests that a lack 
of resources may limit the offer of treatment for 
constipation (high confidence in the evidence) (45).
 D.6: Interventions for varicose veins and oedema
 RECOMMENDATION D.6: Non-pharmacological options, such as compression stockings, leg 
elevation and water immersion, can be used for the management of varicose veins and oedema 
in pregnancy based on a woman’s preferences and available options. (Recommended)
 Remarks
 • Women should be informed that symptoms associated with varicose veins may worsen as pregnancy 
progresses but that most women will experience some improvement within a few months of giving birth.
 • Rest, leg elevation and water immersion are low-cost interventions that are unlikely to be harmful.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of interventions for varicose veins and 
oedema compared with other, no or placebo 
interventions (EB Table D.6)
 The evidence on the effects of various interventions 
for varicose veins in pregnancy was derived from 
a Cochrane review that included seven small trials 
involving 326 women with varicose veins and/or 
oedema, and various types of interventions, including 
rutoside (a phlebotonic drug) versus placebo (two 
trials), foot massage by a professional masseur for 
f
 ive days versus no intervention (1 trial, 80 women), 
intermittent external pneumatic compression with 
a pump versus rest (1 trial, 35 women), standing in 
water at a temperature between 29°C and 33°C for 
20 minutes (water immersion) versus leg elevation 
(1 trial, 32 women) and reflexology versus rest 
(1 trial, 55 women) (160). Another trial comparing 
compression stockings with rest in the left lateral 
position did not contribute any data. Fetal and 
neonatal outcomes relevant to the ANC guideline 
were not reported in these studies.
 Pharmacological interventions versus placebo or no 
intervention
 Only one small trial conducted in 1975 (69 women) 
contributed data. Low-certainty evidence from this 
trial suggests that rutoside may reduce symptoms 
(nocturnal cramps, paraesthesia, tiredness) 
associated with varicose veins compared with 
placebo (69 women; RR: 1.89, 95% CI: 1.11–3.22). 
However, no side-effect data were reported.
 Non-pharmacological interventions versus placebo 
or no intervention
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that reflexology 
may reduce oedema symptoms compared with rest 
only (55 women; RR: 9.09, 95% CI: 1.41–58.54) 
and that water immersion may reduce oedema 
symptoms (leg volume) compared with leg elevation 
(32 women; RR: 0.43, 95% CI: 0.22–0.83). Low
certainty evidence suggests that there may be little 
or no difference in oedema symptoms (measured 
as lower leg circumference in centimetres) between 
foot massage and no intervention (80 women; MD 
in cm: 0.11 less, 95% CI: 1.02 less to 0.80 more) 
and between intermittent pneumatic compression 
and rest (measured as mean leg volume, unit of 
analysis unclear) (35 women; MD: 258.8 lower, 
95% CI: 566.91 lower to 49.31 higher). Only one 
study (reflexology versus rest) evaluated women’s 
satisfaction, but the evidence is of very low 
certainty. 
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
83
Additional considerations
 Acceptability
 n
 n Compression stockings combined with leg 
elevation is the most common non-surgical 
management for varicose veins and oedema; 
however, the Cochrane review found no evidence 
on this practice in pregnancy (160). Compression 
stockings are also widely used to prevent 
morbidity in non-pregnant people with varicose 
veins and the evidence for this practice in a related 
Cochrane review of compression stockings was 
generally very uncertain (167).
 Values
 See “Women’s values” at the beginning of section 
3.D: Background (p. 74).
 Resources
 Postural interventions are low-cost interventions. 
The cost of compression stockings varies but they 
can cost more than US$ 15 per pair. Reflexology and 
professional massage require specialist training, and 
are, therefore, likely to be more costly.
 Equity
 It is not known whether interventions to relieve 
varicose veins and oedema might impact inequalities.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 84
 Qualitative evidence from a range of LMICs suggests 
that women may be more likely to turn to traditional 
healers, herbal remedies or TBAs to treat these 
symptoms (moderate confidence in the evidence) 
(22). In addition, evidence from a diverse range 
of settings indicates that while women generally 
appreciate the interventions and information 
provided during antenatal visits, they are less likely 
to engage with services if their beliefs, traditions 
and socioeconomic circumstances are ignored or 
overlooked by health-care providers and/or policy
makers (high confidence in the evidence). This may 
be particularly pertinent for an intervention like 
reflexology, which may be culturally alien and/or 
poorly understood in certain contexts. Qualitative 
evidence shows that, where there are likely to be 
additional costs associated with treatment or where 
the treatment may be unavailable (because of resource 
constraints), women are less likely to engage with 
health services (high confidence in the evidence).
 Feasibility
 The evidence also suggests that a lack of resources 
may limit the offer of treatment for varicose veins and 
oedema (high confidence in the evidence) (45).
E. Health systems interventions to 
improve the utilization and quality  
of ANC
 Background
 There is a multitude of interventions that can be 
employed to improve the utilization and quality of 
ANC depending on the context and setting. For the 
purposes of this guideline, the GDG considered the 
following interventions:
 1. Women-held case notes (home-based records)
 2. Midwife-led continuity of care models
 3. Group ANC
 4. Community-based interventions to improve 
communication and support
 5. Task shifting
 6. Recruitment and retention of staff
 7. ANC contact schedules.
 How to deliver the type and quality of ANC that 
women want is a vast and complex field of research. 
Interventions designed to increase staff competency, 
to improve staff well-being, and other interventions 
(e.g. financial incentives) to increase access and use 
of ANC are broad topics that were considered beyond 
the scope of this guideline.
 n
 n Women-held case notes: In many countries, 
women are given their own case notes (or home
based records) to carry during pregnancy. Case 
notes may be held in paper (e.g. card, journal, 
handbook) or electronic formats (e.g. memory 
stick), and women are expected to take them 
along to all health visits. If women then move, or 
are referred from one facility to another, and in the 
case of complications where immediate access 
to medical records is not always possible, the 
practice of women-held case notes may improve 
the availability of women’s medical records 
(168). Women-held case notes might also be an 
effective tool to improve health awareness and 
client–provider communication (169). Inadequate 
infrastructure and resources often hamper efficient 
record-keeping, therefore, case notes may be 
less likely to get lost when held personally. In 
addition, the practice may facilitate more accurate 
estimation of gestational age, which is integral to 
evidence-based decision-making, due to improved 
continuity of fetal growth records (170).
 n
 n Midwife-led continuity of care (MLCC) models: 
Midwives are the primary providers of care in 
many ANC settings (171). In MLCC models, a 
known and trusted midwife (caseload midwifery), 
or small group of known midwives (team 
midwifery), supports a woman throughout the 
antenatal, intrapartum and postnatal period, to 
facilitate a healthy pregnancy and childbirth, and 
healthy parenting practices (172). The MLCC 
model includes: continuity of care; monitoring 
the physical, psychological, spiritual and social 
well-being of the woman and family throughout 
the childbearing cycle; providing the woman with 
individualized education, counselling and ANC; 
attendance during labour, birth and the immediate 
postpartum period by a known midwife; ongoing 
support during the postnatal period; minimizing 
unnecessary technological interventions; and 
identifying, referring and coordinating care for 
women who require obstetric or other specialist 
attention (173). Thus, the MLCC model exists 
within a multidisciplinary network in which 
consultation and referral to other care providers 
occurs when necessary. The MLCC model is 
usually aimed at providing care to healthy women 
with uncomplicated pregnancies.
 n
 n Group ANC: ANC conventionally takes the form 
of a one-on-one consultation between a pregnant 
woman and her health-care provider. However, 
group ANC integrates the usual individual 
pregnancy health assessment with tailored group 
educational activities and peer support, with 
the aim of motivating behaviour change among 
pregnant women, improving pregnancy outcomes, 
and increasing women’s satisfaction (174). The 
intervention typically involves self-assessment 
activities (e.g. blood pressure measurement), 
group education with facilitated discussion, and 
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
85
time to socialize. Group ANC needs to be delivered 
in a space large enough to accommodate a group 
of women, with a private area for examinations.
 n
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 86
 n Community-based interventions to improve 
communication and support: The scoping review 
conducted for the ANC guideline identified 
communication and support for women as 
integral components of positive pregnancy 
experiences. The term “communicate” refers to 
the act of sharing information, education and 
communication with women about timely and 
relevant physiological, biomedical, behavioural 
and sociocultural issues; “support” refers to social, 
cultural, emotional and psychological support (13). 
Having access to appropriate communication and 
support is a key element of a quality ANC service. 
A human-rights-based approach recognizes that 
women are entitled to participate in decisions that 
affect their sexual and reproductive health (1). In 
addition, pregnant women have a right to access 
quality health-care services and, particularly in 
low-resource settings, may need to be empowered 
to do so. Interventions that increase the dialogue 
around awareness of a women’s rights, barriers 
and facilitators to utilizing ANC rvices and keeping 
healthy during pregnancy and beyond (including 
dialogue around newborn care and postnatal 
family planning), and providing women and their 
partners with support in addressing challenges 
they may face, may lead to improved ANC uptake 
and quality of care.
 n
 n ANC contact schedules: In 2002, the WHO 
recommended a focused or goal-orientated 
approach to ANC to improve quality of care and 
increase ANC coverage, particularly in LMICs (12). 
The focused ANC (FANC) model, also known as 
the basic ANC model, includes four ANC visits 
occurring between 8 and 12 weeks of gestation, 
between 24 and 26 weeks, at 32 weeks, and 
between 36 and 38 weeks. Guidance on each visit 
includes specific evidence-based interventions for 
healthy pregnant women (called “goal-oriented”), 
with appropriate referral of high-risk women and 
those who develop pregnancy complications. The 
number of visits in this model is considerably fewer 
than in ANC models used in HICs.
 The GDG considered the available evidence and 
other relevant information on these interventions to 
determine whether they should be recommended for 
ANC (Recommendations E1 to E5). The GDG also 
considered existing recommendations from other 
WHO guidelines on task shifting and recruitment and 
retention of staff in rural areas (Recommendations E5 
and E6).
 Women’s values
 A scoping review of what women want from ANC 
and what outcomes they value informed the ANC 
guideline (13). Evidence showed that women from 
high-, medium- and low-resource settings valued 
having a positive pregnancy experience. Within a 
health systems context, this included the adoption 
of flexible appointment systems and continuity of 
provider care where women were given privacy and 
time to build authentic and supportive relationships 
with maternity-care providers (high confidence in 
the evidence).
E.1: Women-held case notes
 RECOMMENDATION E.1: It is recommended that each pregnant woman carries her own case 
notes during pregnancy to improve continuity, quality of care and her pregnancy experience. 
(Recommended)
 Remarks
 • The GDG noted that women-held case notes are widely used and are often the only medical records 
available in various LMIC settings.
 • The GDG agreed that the benefits of women-held case notes outweigh the disadvantages. However, 
careful consideration should be given as to what personal information it is necessary to include in the 
case notes, to avoid stigma and discrimination in certain settings. In addition, health-system planners 
should ensure that admission to hospitals or other health-care facilities do not depend on women 
presenting their case notes.
 • Health-system planners should consider which form the women-held case notes should take (electronic 
or paper-based), whether whole sets of case notes will be held by women or only specific parts of them, 
and how copies will be kept by health-care facilities.
 • For paper-based systems, health-system planners also need to ensure that case notes are durable and 
transportable. Health systems that give women access to their case notes through electronic systems 
need to ensure that all pregnant women have access to the appropriate technology and that attention is 
paid to data security.
 • Health-system planners should ensure that the contents of the case notes are accessible to all pregnant 
women through the use of appropriate, local languages and appropriate reading levels.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of women-held case notes compared 
with other practices (EB Table E.1)
 The evidence on the effects of women-held case 
notes was mostly derived from a Cochrane review that 
included four small trials involving 1176 women (168). 
Trials were conducted in Australia, Mongolia and the 
United Kingdom (2 trials). In three trials, women in 
the intervention groups were given their complete 
antenatal records (paper) to carry during pregnancy. 
In the remaining trial, a cluster randomized controlled 
trial (RCT) involving 501 women in Mongolia, women 
in the intervention group carried a maternal and child 
health handbook that included antenatal, postnatal and 
child health records. Antenatal records were facility
held in the control groups. Data on ANC coverage 
for the Mongolian trial were derived separately from 
another Cochrane review (175).
 Maternal outcomes
 With regard to maternal satisfaction, moderate
certainty evidence indicates that women who carry 
their own case notes are probably more likely to feel 
in control of their pregnancy experience than women 
whose records are facility-held (2 trials, 450 women; 
RR: 1.56, 95% CI: 1.18–2.06). Low-certainty evidence 
suggests that women-held case notes may have 
little or no effect on women’s satisfaction with ANC 
(2 trials, 698 women; RR: 1.09, 95% CI: 0.92–1.29). 
Evidence on caesarean section was very uncertain 
and other guideline outcomes were not reported in 
the review.
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that women-held 
case notes may have little or no effect on perinatal 
mortality (2 trials, 713 women; RR: 0.77, 95% CI: 
0.17–3.48). No other fetal and neonatal outcomes 
were reported in the review.
 Coverage outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that women-held 
case notes may have little or no effect on ANC 
coverage of four or more visits (1 trial, 501 women; 
RR: 1.25, 95% CI: 0.31–5.00).
 Additional considerations
 n
 n Other evidence from the review suggests that 
there may be little or no difference in the risk of 
case notes being lost or left at home for a visit 
(2 trials, 347 women; RR: 0.38, 95% CI: 0.04
3.84).
 n
 n A WHO multicentre cohort study of home-based 
maternal records (HBMR), involving 590 862 
women in Egypt, India, Pakistan, Philippines, 
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
87
Acceptability
 Senegal, Sri Lanka, Yemen and Zambia, was 
conducted between 1984 and 1988 (176). The 
study reported that “The introduction of the HBMR 
increased the diagnosis and referral of at-risk 
pregnant women and newborn infants, improved 
family planning and health education, increased 
tetanus toxoid immunization, and provided a 
means of collecting health information in the 
community. The HBMR was liked by mothers, 
community health workers and other health
care personnel because, by using it, the mothers 
became more involved in looking after their own 
health and that of their babies.”
 Values
 See “Women’s values” at the beginning of section 3.E: 
Background (p. 86).
 Resources
 Resource implications differ depending on whether 
electronic or paper-based systems are used. 
Electronic systems require more resources. Paper
based systems require the production of durable, 
transportable journals, as well as systems for keeping 
copies. The need to adapt and/or translate journals 
may add to costs.
 Equity
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 88
 The GDG considered that women-held case notes 
could be subject to abuse and used to discriminate 
against women who do not have them, or if the 
information contained in the notes is associated with 
stigma (e.g. HIV-positive status). Less-educated 
women with lower health literacy may be less able 
to read and understand their own case notes, which 
might perpetuate inequalities.
 Qualitative evidence suggests that women from a 
variety of settings are likely to favour carrying their 
case notes because of the increased opportunity to 
acquire pregnancy and health-related information 
and the associated sense of empowerment this brings 
(high confidence in the evidence) (22). There may 
be potential for abuse of the system in some LMIC 
settings, for example, by limiting access to hospitals 
for women who do not have case notes, particularly 
where maternity services are under-resourced 
(moderate confidence in the evidence). Further 
evidence from a mixed-methods review supports 
RCT evidence that women feel more satisfied when 
they carry, or have access to, their own case notes 
(177). These review findings were not subject to 
GRADE-CERQual assessments of confidence, and 
were derived primarily from high-income settings 
(36 out of 37 studies). Findings also suggest that 
providers are generally happy for women to carry 
their own case notes, but feel the implementation of 
the approach may generate additional administrative 
responsibilities. Providers also raised concerns about 
data security, sensitivity of the shared information, 
and the potential for data to be lost because of 
fragmented systems.
 Feasibility
 There may be prohibitive additional costs associated 
with using an electronic system (USB memory sticks, 
software packages, etc.) in some LMIC settings (high 
confidence in the evidence), although paper-based 
records may require little in the way of extra cost or 
resources (45).
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 89
 E.2: Midwife-led continuity of care (MLCC)
 RECOMMENDATION E.2: Midwife-led continuity-of-care models, in which a known midwife or 
small group of known midwives supports a woman throughout the antenatal, intrapartum and 
postnatal continuum, are recommended for pregnant women in settings with well functioning 
midwifery programmes. (Context-specific recommendation)
 Remarks
 • MLCC models are models of care in which a known and trusted midwife (caseload midwifery), or small 
group of known midwives (team midwifery), supports a woman throughout the antenatal, intrapartum 
and postnatal period, to facilitate a healthy pregnancy and childbirth, and healthy parenting practices.
 • MLCC models are complex interventions and it is unclear whether the pathway of influence producing 
these positive effects is the continuity of care, the midwifery philosophy of care or both. The midwifery 
philosophy inherent in MLCC models may or may not be enacted in standard midwife practice in other 
models of care.
 • Policy-makers in settings without well functioning midwife programmes should consider implementing 
this model only after successfully scaling up of the number and quality of practising midwives. In addition, 
stakeholders may wish to consider ways of providing continuous care through other care providers, because 
women value continuity of care.
 • The panel noted that with this model of care it is important to monitor resource use, and provider burnout 
and workload, to determine whether caseload or team care models are more sustainable in individual 
settings.
 • MLCC requires that well trained midwives are available in sufficient numbers for each woman to see one 
or only a small group of midwives throughout pregnancy and during childbirth. This model may therefore 
require a shift in resources to ensure that the health system has access to a sufficient number of midwives 
with reasonable caseloads.
 • The introduction of MLCC may lead to a shift in the roles and responsibilities of midwives as well as other 
health-care professionals who have previously been responsible for antenatal and postnatal care. Where 
this is the case, implementation is likely to be more effective if all relevant stakeholders are consulted 
and human resources departments are involved. In some settings, government-level consultation with 
professional organizations could also aid implementation processes.
 • The need for additional one-off or continuing training and education should be assessed, and should be 
provided where necessary.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of MLCC models compared with other 
models of care (EB Table E.2)
 The evidence on the effects of MLCC models of care 
was derived from a Cochrane review that included 
15 trials involving 17 674 women, in which pregnant 
women were randomized to receive ANC either by 
MLCC models or by other models of care (172). All 
the studies included were conducted in public health 
systems in HICs (Australia, Canada, Ireland and 
the United Kingdom) and 14 out of 15 contributed 
data. Eight trials compared an MLCC model with 
a shared care model, three trials compared MLCC 
with medical-led care, and three compared MLCC 
with “standard care” (mixed-care options, including 
midwife-led non-continuous care, medical-led, and 
shared care). Some MLCC models included routine 
visits to an obstetrician and/or family doctor. Eight 
trials included women with “low-risk” pregnancies 
only; six also included women with “high-risk” 
pregnancies. Four trials evaluated one-to-one 
(caseload) MLCC and 10 trials evaluated team MLCC. 
Caseload sizes for one-to-one models ranged from 32 
to 45 pregnant women per midwife per year. Levels of 
continuity of care were measured (as the proportion 
of births attended to by a known carer), and were 
in the ranges of 63–98% for MLCC and 0–21% for 
other models. A random effects model was used in all 
meta-analyses.
 Maternal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence shows that MLCC 
compared with other models of care probably slightly 
increases the chance of a vaginal birth (12 trials, 
16 687 participants; RR: 1.05, 95% CI: 1.03–1.07). 
MLCC may reduce caesarean sections (14 trials, 
17 674 participants; RR: 0.92, 95% CI: 0.84–1.00), 
however, this evidence is of low certainty and includes 
the possibility of no effect. Low-certainty evidence 
suggests that MLCC models may be associated with 
lower rates of instrumental vaginal delivery than 
other models (13 trials, 17 501 participants; RR: 0.90, 
95% CI: 0.83–0.97).
 Maternal satisfaction: The Cochrane review tabulated 
data on women’s satisfaction pertaining to various 
aspects of antenatal, intrapartum and postnatal care. 
A meta-analysis on satisfaction with ANC only was 
performed for the purposes of this guideline (see EB 
Table E.2), the findings of which suggest that MLCC 
models may increase the proportion of women 
reporting high levels of satisfaction with the ANC 
compared with other models (4 trials, 5419 women; 
RR: 1.31, 95% CI: 1.11–1.54; low-certainty evidence).
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 90
 Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that MLCC 
probably reduces the risk of preterm birth (8 trials, 
13 338 participants; RR: 0.76, 95% CI: 0.64–0.91) 
and probably reduces perinatal mortality (defined in 
the review as fetal loss after 24 weeks of gestation 
and neonatal death) (13 trials, 17 561 women; RR: 
0.84, 95% CI: 0.71–0.99). However, low-certainty 
evidence suggests that it may have little or no effect 
on low birth weight (7 trials, 11 458 women; RR: 0.96, 
95% CI: 0.82–1.13). Evidence on other ANC guideline 
outcomes was not available in the review.
 Additional considerations
 n
 n Although the mechanism for the probable 
reduction in preterm birth and perinatal death 
is unclear, the GDG considered the consistency 
of the results and the absence of harm to be 
important.
 Values
 See “Women’s values” at the beginning of section 3.E: 
Background (p. 86).
 Resources
 In settings with well functioning midwife programmes, 
a shift in resources may be necessary to ensure 
that the health system has sufficient midwives with 
reasonable caseloads. There may also be training costs 
associated with changing to an MLCC model. However, 
one study in the Cochrane review found that ANC 
provider costs were 20–25% lower with the MLCC 
model than other midwife-led care due to differences 
in staff costs (178).
 Equity
 Equitable coverage and improvements in the quality 
of midwifery practice are major challenges in many 
LMICs (171). MLCC models in any setting have the 
potential to help to address health inequalities, for 
example, by providing a more supportive setting for 
disadvantaged women to disclose information that 
may facilitate the identification of risk factors for poor 
outcomes, such as intimate partner violence.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence synthesized from a wide variety 
of settings and contexts indicates that women 
welcome the opportunity to build supportive, 
caring relationships with a midwife or a small 
number of midwives during the maternity phase 
(high confidence in the evidence) and appreciate 
a consistent, unhurried, woman-centred approach 
during ANC visits (high confidence in the evidence) 
(22). Evidence from providers, mainly in HICs, 
indicates that they view MLCC as a way of achieving 
the authentic, supportive relationships that women 
desire (moderate confidence in the evidence). There 
is very little evidence on MLCC models from LMICs. 
However, indirect evidence from providers in these 
locations suggests that they would welcome the 
opportunity to use an MLCC model but feel they do 
not have the resources to do so (low confidence in 
the evidence).
 Feasibility
 Qualitative evidence from high-, medium- and 
low-resource settings highlights concerns among 
providers about potential staffing issues, e.g. for the 
delivery of caseload or one-to-one approaches (high 
confidence in the evidence) (45).
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 91
 E.3: Group antenatal care
 RECOMMENDATION E.3: Group antenatal care provided by qualified health-care professionals 
may be offered as an alternative to individual antenatal care for pregnant women in the context 
of rigorous research, depending on a woman’s preferences and provided that the infrastructure 
and resources for delivery of group antenatal care are available. (Context-specific recommendation – research)
 Remarks
 • With the group ANC model, the first visit for all pregnant women is an individual visit. Then at subsequent 
visits, the usual individual pregnancy health assessment, held in a private examination area, is integrated 
into a group ANC session, with facilitated educational activities and peer support.
 • Health-care facilities need to be seeing sufficient numbers of pregnant women, as allocation to groups is 
ideally performed according to gestational age.
 • Health-care providers need to have appropriate facilities to deal with group sessions, including access 
to large, well ventilated rooms or sheltered spaces with adequate seating. A private space should be 
available for examinations, and opportunities should be given for private conversations.
 • Group ANC may take longer than individual ANC, and this may pose practical problems for some women 
in terms of work and childcare. Health-care providers should be able to offer a variety of time slots for 
group sessions (morning, afternoon, evening) and should consider making individual care available as 
well.
 • The GDG noted that group ANC may have acceptability and feasibility issues in settings where perceived 
differences keep people apart, e.g. women from different castes in India may not wish to be in a group 
together.
 • Group ANC studies are under way in Nepal, Uganda and five other low-income countries, and the GDG 
was informed by a GDG member that some of these studies are due to report soon. Core outcomes of 
studies of group ANC should include maternal and perinatal health outcomes, coverage, and women's 
and providers' experiences.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of group ANC compared with individual 
ANC (EB Table E.3)
 The evidence on the effects of group ANC was 
derived from a Cochrane review that included 
four trials involving 2350 women (174). Two trials 
from the USA used a group ANC model known as 
CenteringPregnancy®, in which group ANC was 
conducted in circles of 8–12 women of similar 
gestational age, meeting for 8–10 sessions during 
pregnancy, with each session lasting 90–120 minutes. 
ssions included self-assessment activities (blood 
pressure measurement), facilitated educational 
discussions and time to socialize, with individual 
examinations performed in a private/screened
off area. One trial conducted in Sweden used a 
group model similar to the USA model but mainly 
assessed provider outcomes and contributed little 
data to the review. The fourth trial, conducted in the 
Islamic Republic of Iran, was a cluster-RCT in which 
group ANC was described as being similar to the 
CenteringPregnancy® approach.
 Maternal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that group 
ANC probably does not have an important effect on 
vaginal birth rates compared with individual ANC 
(1 trial, 322 women; RR: 0.96, 95% CI: 0.80–1.15). 
But low-certainty evidence suggests that it may lead 
to higher women’s satisfaction scores (1 trial, 993 
women; MD: 4.9, 95% CI: 3.10–6.70).
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that group 
ANC probably has little or no effect on low birth 
weight (3 trials, 1935 neonates; RR: 0.92, 95% CI: 
0.68–1.23) and low-certainty evidence suggests that 
it may have little or no effect on perinatal mortality 
(3 trials, 1943 neonates; RR: 0.63, 95% CI: 0.32–1.25). 
However, low-certainty evidence also suggests that 
group ANC may reduce preterm birth (3 trials, 1888 
women; RR: 0.75, 95% CI: 0.57–1.00); this evidence 
includes the possibility of no effect. Evidence on 
the risk of having an SGA neonate is of a very low 
certainty.
Additional considerations
 n
 n There is little evidence on the effects of group 
ANC from LMICs. However, a feasibility study 
conducted in Ghana suggests that group ANC 
might improve women’s pregnancy experiences, 
and providers’ experiences, and potentially 
improve health outcomes in low-income settings, 
due to improved health literacy and better 
engagement of pregnant women with ANC (179).
 n
 n It is plausible that group ANC may have an impact 
on other outcomes outside the scope of the 
ANC guideline, such as breastfeeding initiation 
and postnatal contraception, by improving 
communication and social support related to these 
healthy behaviours; but the evidence on these 
potential effects is limited (180).
 Values
 See “Women’s values” at the beginning of section 3.E: 
Background (p. 86).
 Resources
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 92
 It has been suggested that group ANC may be 
associated with lower health-care provider costs due 
to increased staff productivity and efficiency; e.g. 
health-care providers do not need to repeat advice 
to each woman individually, and they may be less 
likely to feel overwhelmed by long queues of women 
waiting to be seen (181, 182). However, training and 
supervising health-care providers to conduct group
based counselling and participatory discussions is 
also associated with cost. Group ANC visits take 
longer than individual visits, therefore, from a user 
perspective, there may be additional costs associated 
with the time each pregnant woman needs to take 
off work. However, in many settings, long waiting 
times are the norm, so group ANC with a scheduled 
appointment could represent a reduced visit time.
 Equity
 Less-educated women are more likely to have poor 
maternal health literacy than more-educated women 
(179). Therefore, interventions such as group ANC that 
aim to improve women’s ability to access, understand 
and use educational materials could have a positive 
impact on reducing health inequalities by improving 
maternal health literacy among disadvantaged 
women. In addition, social support is often lacking for 
disadvantaged women and group ANC may help to 
reduce inequalities by facilitating the development of 
peer support networks. However, in certain settings, 
where group ANC sessions take longer than standard 
ANC visits, there may be greater cost implications 
for disadvantaged women. In addition, in settings 
with poor transport systems or variable weather, the 
appointment system with group ANC may not be 
suitable and may have a negative impact on equity 
for women living in remote areas. Furthermore, some 
disadvantaged women might find it harder to disclose 
personal information in a group setting and might 
prefer a more private approach to ANC.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence from several HICs suggests 
that women enjoy the group format and use the 
opportunity to build socially supportive relationships 
with other pregnant women and health-care 
professionals (high confidence in the evidence) 
(22). The flexibility of the format allows women to 
exchange valuable information with each other and 
discuss pregnancy-related concerns in a relaxed 
and informal manner (high confidence in the 
evidence). Most women appreciate the additional 
time inherent in the group approach (high confidence 
in the evidence), although some women do not 
attend group sessions because of the additional 
time commitments (moderate confidence in the 
evidence). Some women have reservations about the 
lack of privacy during the group sessions, particularly 
during physical examinations (low confidence in 
the evidence) and the desire to have partners/
 husbands included varies (moderate confidence 
in the evidence). Evidence from providers in HICs 
suggests they find group sessions to be enjoyable 
and satisfying and a more efficient use of their 
time (moderate confidence in the evidence) (45). 
Providers also identified the group approach as a way 
of providing continuity of care (moderate confidence 
in the evidence).
 Feasibility
 Qualitative evidence from high-resource settings 
suggests that health-care professionals view the 
facilitative components of group ANC as a skill 
requiring additional investment in terms of training 
and provider commitment (moderate confidence 
in the evidence) (45). Some providers also feel that 
clinics need to be better equipped to deliver group 
sessions, i.e. clinics need to have large enough rooms 
with adequate seating (moderate confidence in the 
evidence). The feasibility of group ANC in low
resource settings needs further research; however, 
pilot studies in Ghana, Malawi and the United 
Republic of Tanzania suggest that group ANC is 
feasible in these settings (181). It has been suggested 
that group ANC may be a feasible way of improving 
ANC quality in settings where relatively few providers 
attend to relatively large numbers of women in a 
limited time and, as such, effective communication 
can be challenging (182). Others have suggested 
that the group approach may be a sustainable way of 
providing continuity of care (181).
 E.4: Community-based interventions to improve communication and support
 E.4.1: Facilitated participatory learning and action (PLA) cycles with women’s groups
 RECOMMENDATION E.4.1: The implementation of community mobilization through facilitated 
participatory learning and action (PLA) cycles with women’s groups is recommended to improve 
maternal and newborn health, particularly in rural settings with low access to health services. 
Participatory women’s groups represent an opportunity for women to discuss their needs during 
pregnancy, including barriers to reaching care, and to increase support to pregnant women.
 (Context-specific recommendation)
 Remarks
 • Part of this recommendation was integrated from WHO recommendations on community mobilization 
through facilitated participatory learning and action cycles with women’s groups for maternal and newborn 
health (2014) (183).
 • The pathways of influence of this multifaceted, context-specific intervention on maternal and newborn 
outcomes are difficult to assess. Women meeting to identify their needs and seek solutions plays an 
important role; mechanisms related to additional activities that are organized based on the solutions 
identified at the meetings may also play a role.
 • Detailed information and guidance related to the recommendation, including important implementation 
considerations, can be found in the 2014 WHO recommendations on PLA cycles (183), available at:  
http://www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/documents/community-mobilization-maternal
newborn/en/
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of community mobilization through 
facilitated PLA cycles and women’s groups 
versus standard care (EB Table E.4.1)
 The evidence on the effects of community 
mobilization interventions was synthesized for this 
guideline from data derived from a Cochrane review 
of health system and community-level interventions 
for improving ANC coverage and health outcomes 
(175). Seven cluster-RCTs conducted between 1999 
and 2011, involving approximately 116 805 women, 
contributed data to this comparison. Trials were 
conducted in Bangladesh (2), India (2), Malawi (2) 
and Nepal (1), and six out of seven were conducted 
in low-resource, rural settings (184–190). The 
intervention consisted of involving women (pregnant 
and non-pregnant) in PLA cycles facilitated by 
trained facilitators, with the aim of identifying, 
prioritizing and addressing problems women face 
around pregnancy, childbirth and after birth, and 
empowering women to seek care and choose healthy 
pregnancy and newborn care behaviours (191). 
Meetings were usually held on a monthly basis and 
specific activities were prioritized according to the 
local context and conditions. Coverage of women’s 
group meetings ranged from one group per 309 to 
one group per 1414 people in the population among 
included trials, with the proportion of pregnant 
women attending groups ranging from 2% to 51%. 
Five out of seven trials were conducted against 
a backdrop of context-specific health system 
strengthening in both intervention and control 
arms; these included training of TBAs and provision 
of basic equipment to TBAs and/or primary care 
facilities in four trials. Random effects models were 
used and sensitivity analyses were performed by 
including only those trials in which pregnant women 
comprised more than 30% of the women’s groups.
 Maternal outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that participatory 
women’s groups (PWGs) may reduce maternal 
mortality (7 trials; RR: 0.78, 95% CI: 0.60–1.03). This 
interpretation is confirmed by the sensitivity analysis 
that included only those trials in which the women’s 
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
93
n
 groups included more than 30% pregnant women 
(4 trials; RR: 0.67, 95% CI: 0.47–0.95).
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that PWGs may 
reduce perinatal mortality (6 trials; RR: 0.91, 95% CI: 
0.82–1.01). This interpretation is confirmed by the 
sensitivity analysis that included only those trials in 
which pregnant women comprised more than 30% 
of the women’s groups (4 trials; RR: 0.85, 95% CI: 
0.77–0.94).
 Coverage outcomes
 Low-certainty evidence suggests that PWGs may 
have little or no effect on ANC coverage of at least 
four visits (3 trials; RR: 1.05, 95% CI: 0.78–1.41), 
facility-based delivery (5 trials; RR: 1.04, 95% CI: 
0.89–1.22) and ANC coverage of at least one visit 
(6 trials; RR: 1.43, 95% CI: 0.81–2.51). However, 
evidence from the sensitivity analysis, which included 
only those trials in which pregnant women comprised 
more than 30% of the women’s groups, suggests that 
PWGs may increase ANC coverage of at least one 
visit (3 trials; RR: 1.77, 95% CI: 1.21–2.58).
 Additional considerations
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 94
 Findings are consistent with a 2013 review of PWGs 
(191), which provided low-quality evidence that 
women’s groups reduced maternal mortality (OR: 
0.63, 95% CI: 0.32–0.94) and moderate-quality 
evidence that women’s groups reduced neonatal 
mortality (OR: 0.77, 95% CI: 0.65–0.90). The latter 
review formed the evidence base for the 2014 WHO 
recommendation on PWGs (183).
 n The existing WHO recommendation on PWGs is 
as follows:
 “The implementation of community 
mobilization through facilitated participatory 
learning and action cycles with women’s groups 
is recommended to improve maternal and 
newborn health, particularly in rural settings 
with low access to health services (strong 
recommendation; moderate-quality evidence 
on neonatal mortality, low-quality evidence 
for maternal mortality and care-seeking 
outcomes)” (183).
 The GDG that developed this recommendation 
advised that any intervention designed to 
increase access to health services should be 
implemented in tandem with strategies to 
improve the quality of the health services. It 
also highlighted the need for more research 
to understand the effects of community 
mobilization on care-seeking outcomes in 
different contexts, and recommended the need 
for close monitoring and evaluation to ensure 
high quality implementation adapted to the 
local context.
 Values
 See “Women’s values” at the beginning of section 
3.E: Background (p. 86).
 Resources, Equity, Acceptability and Feasibility
 See the “Summary of evidence and considerations” 
for Recommendation E.4.2.
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 95
 E.4.2: Community mobilization and antenatal home visits
 RECOMMENDATION E.4.2: Packages of interventions that include household and community 
mobilization and antenatal home visits are recommended to improve antenatal care utilization 
and perinatal health outcomes, particularly in rural settings with low access to health services.
 (Context-specific recommendation)
 Remarks
 • The GDG agreed that the extent to which these packages improve communication and support for 
pregnant women is not clear.
 • As a stand-alone intervention, the evidence does not support the use of antenatal home visits by lay 
health workers during pregnancy to improve ANC utilization health outcomes. While the quality and 
effectiveness of communication during home visits, and the extent to which they increase support 
for women, is not clear, antenatal home visits may be helpful in ensuring continuity of care across the 
antenatal, intrapartum and postnatal periods and in promoting other healthy behaviour.
 • Stakeholders need to be clear that antenatal home visits by lay health workers do not replace ANC visits.
 • Stakeholders should implement health system strengthening interventions alongside these community
based interventions.
 • Health-care providers need initial and ongoing training in communication with women and their partners. 
For women’s groups and community mobilization, providers also need training on group facilitation, in the 
convening of public meetings and in other methods of communication.
 • Information for women and community members should be provided in languages and formats accessible 
to them and programme planners need to ensure that health-care providers/facilitators have reliable 
supplies of appropriate information materials.
 • Programme planners should be aware of the potential for additional costs associated with home visits and 
community mobilization initiatives, including the potential need for extra staff and travel expenses.
 • When considering the use of antenatal home visits, women’s groups, partner involvement or community 
mobilization, programme planners need to ensure that these can be implemented in a way that respects 
and facilitates women’s needs for privacy as well as their choices and their autonomy in decision-making. 
By offering pregnant women a range of opportunities for contact, communication and support, their 
individual preferences and circumstances should also be addressed.
 • Further research is needed on the acceptability and feasibility of mixed-gender communication, the 
optimal methods for community mobilization, the best model for integration with health systems, 
continuity elements of home visits, and the mechanisms of effect of these interventions.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of communication and support provided 
to women through community mobilization and 
home visits during pregnancy versus standard 
care (EB Table E.4.2)
 The evidence on the effects of community 
mobilization and antenatal home visits was 
synthesized from data derived from a Cochrane 
review of health system and community-level 
interventions for improving ANC coverage and health 
outcomes (175). Four large cluster-RCTs conducted 
in rural Bangladesh, India and Pakistan contributed 
data on packages of interventions involving 
community mobilization and antenatal home visits 
versus no intervention (192–195). Health system 
strengthening occurred in both the intervention 
and control groups in two of the trials. The focus of 
these packages was generally to promote maternal 
health education, ANC attendance and other care
seeking behaviour, tetanus toxoid vaccinations 
and iron and folic acid supplements, and birth and 
newborn-care preparedness. Household visits 
were performed by trained lay health workers and 
consisted of at least two visits during pregnancy. 
In two trials, these visits were targeted to occur at 
12–16 weeks of gestation and 32–34 weeks; in one 
trial, these visits both occurred in the third trimester; 
and in the fourth trial the timing of the visits was 
not specified. Multilevel community mobilization 
strategies included advocacy work with community 
stakeholders (community leaders, teachers, and 
other respected members), TBAs, husbands or 
partners, and households (husbands or partners, 
women, and other family members). Two intervention 
packages included group education sessions for 
women focusing on key knowledge and behaviour 
around pregnancy and early neonatal care, including 
promotion of ANC and other health education. One 
intervention package included husband education 
via booklets and audio cassettes. Training of TBAs 
to recognize common obstetric and newborn 
emergencies was a component of three intervention 
packages. In one trial, telecommunication systems 
with transport linkages were also set up as part of 
the intervention package. In another trial, community 
health committees were encouraged to establish an 
emergency transport fund and use local vehicles, 
in addition to advocacy work, household visits and 
women’s meetings.
 Maternal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that 
intervention packages with community mobilization 
and antenatal home visits probably have little or no 
effect on maternal mortality (2 trials; RR: 0.76, 95% 
CI: 0.44–1.31).
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 96
 Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that 
intervention packages with community mobilization 
and antenatal home visits probably reduce perinatal 
mortality (3 trials; RR: 0.65, 95% CI: 0.48–0.88).
 Coverage outcomes
 High-certainty evidence shows that intervention 
packages with community mobilization and antenatal 
home visits improve ANC coverage of at least one 
visit (4 trials; RR: 1.76, 95% CI: 1.43–2.16). However, 
moderate-certainty evidence indicates that they 
probably have little or no effect on ANC coverage 
of at least four visits (1 trial; RR: 1.51, 95% CI: 0.50
4.59) or facility-based birth (3 trials; RR: 1.46, 95% 
CI: 0.87–2.46).
 Additional considerations
 n
 n The GDG also considered evidence on antenatal 
home visits as a stand-alone intervention, but 
did not make a separate recommendation on 
this intervention due to the lack of evidence of 
benefits related to the ANC guideline outcomes. 
In brief, evidence of moderate- to high-certainty 
suggests that stand-alone antenatal home visits 
have little or no effect on ANC visit coverage 
of at least four visits (4 trials; RR: 1.09, 95% CI: 
0.99–1.22), facility-based birth (4 trials; RR: 1.08, 
95% CI: 0.87–1.35), perinatal mortality (4 trials; 
RR: 0.91, 95% CI: 0.79–1.05) and preterm birth 
(1 trial; RR: 0.88, 95% CI: 0.54–1.44) (see Web 
supplement).
 n
 n The 2013 WHO recommendations on postnatal care 
of the mother and newborn include the following 
recommendation:
 “Home visits in the first week after birth are 
recommended for care of the mother and 
newborn (strong recommendation based 
on high-quality evidence for newborns and 
low-quality evidence for mothers).” This 
recommendation is accompanied by the 
remark “Depending on the existing health 
system in different settings, these home 
visits can be made by midwives, other skilled 
providers or well trained and supervised 
CHWs [community health workers]” (196).
 n
 n
 n
 n
 n The 2011 WHO guidelines on Preventing early 
pregnancy and poor reproductive outcomes among 
adolescents in developing countries strongly 
recommend the following in relation to the 
outcome “Increase use of skilled antenatal, 
childbirth and postnatal care among adolescents”:– “Provide information to all pregnant adolescents 
and other stakeholders about the importance of 
utilizing skilled antenatal care.”– “Provide information to all pregnant adolescents 
and other stakeholders about the importance of 
utilizing skilled childbirth care.”– “Promote birth and emergency preparedness 
in antenatal care strategies for pregnant 
adolescents (in household, community and 
health facility settings)” (197).
 n
 n Several WHO recommendations included in the 
2015 WHO recommendations on health promotion 
interventions for maternal and newborn health 
are relevant to community-based interventions to 
improve communication and support for women 
during pregnancy (198) – these are presented in 
Box 3.
 Values
 See “Women’s values” at the beginning of section 3.E: 
Background (p. 86).
 Resources
 A systematic review of the cost–effectiveness of 
strategies to improve the utilization and provision 
of maternal and newborn health care in low- and 
lower-middle-income countries reported that 
there was reasonably strong evidence for the 
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 97
 Box 3: Relevant recommendations from the 2015 WHO recommendations on health promotion 
interventions for maternal and newborn health
 Recommendation 1: Birth preparedness and complication readiness interventions are recommended to 
increase the use of skilled care at birth and to increase the timely use of facility care for obstetric and newborn 
complications. (Strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence.)
 Recommendation 2: Interventions to promote the involvement of men during pregnancy, childbirth and after 
birth are recommended to facilitate and support improved self-care of women, improved home care practices 
for women and newborns, and improved use of skilled care during pregnancy, childbirth and the postnatal 
period for women and newborns. (Strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence.) These interventions are 
recommended provided that they are implemented in a way that respects, promotes and facilitates women’s 
choices and their autonomy in decision-making, and supports women in taking care of themselves and their 
newborns. In order to ensure this, rigorous monitoring and evaluation of implementation is recommended.
 Recommendation 3 on interventions to promote awareness of human, sexual and reproductive rights and the right 
to access quality skilled care: Because of the paucity of evidence available, additional research is recommended. 
The GDG supports, as a matter of principle, the importance for MNH programmes to inform women about their 
right to health and to access quality skilled care, and to continue to empower them to access such care.
 Recommendation 6 on partnership with traditional birth attendants (TBAs): Where TBAs remain the 
main providers of care at birth, dialogue with TBAs, women, families, communities and service providers is 
recommended in order to define and agree on alternative roles for TBAs, recognizing the important role they can 
play in supporting the health of women and newborns. (Strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence.)
 Recommendation 7: Ongoing dialogue with communities is recommended as an essential component in defining 
the characteristics of culturally appropriate, quality maternity care services that address the needs of women and 
newborns and incorporate their cultural preferences. Mechanisms that ensure women’s voices are meaningfully 
included in these dialogues are also recommended. (Strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence.)
 Recommendation 11: Community participation in quality-improvement processes for maternity care services is 
recommended to improve quality of care from the perspectives of women, communities and health-care providers. 
Communities should be involved in jointly defining and assessing quality. Mechanisms that ensure women’s voices 
are meaningfully included are also recommended. (Strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence.)
 Recommendation 12: Community participation in programme planning, implementation and monitoring is 
recommended to improve use of skilled care during pregnancy, childbirth and the postnatal period for women and 
newborns, increase the timely use of facility care for obstetric and newborn complications and improve maternal 
and newborn health. Mechanisms that ensure women’s voices are meaningfully included are also recommended. 
(Strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence.)
 Source: WHO, 2015 (198).
 cost–effectiveness of the use of PLA cycles (199). 
Estimated costs per life saved for PLA cycle 
interventions alone was US$ 268 and for community 
mobilization combined with home visits during 
pregnancy and/or health system strengthening, 
costs ranged from US$ 707 to US$ 1489 per death 
averted. However, costs of these interventions 
are difficult to estimate and depend on context. 
Costing must also take into account the facilitators’ 
time, training and supervision; these elements are 
considered key to the quality of implementation and 
the success of the intervention.
 Equity
 Interventions such as PLA cycles, community 
mobilization and home visits during pregnancy are 
a way of facilitating dialogue and action with, and 
empowering, disadvantaged populations to engage in 
efforts to improve health and to strengthen broader 
community support. The women’s groups PLA cycles, 
in particular, were conducted in marginalized areas 
where other support mechanisms often do not exist. 
Interventions to engage male partners/husbands and 
others in the community to support women to make 
healthy choices for themselves and their children 
may help to address inequalities. However, when 
engaging men, it is important to consider women’s 
preferences, as including male partners could also 
have a negative effect for women who would prefer to 
discuss pregnancy-related and other matters without 
their partner’s involvement.
 Acceptability
 Qualitative evidence suggests that women in a 
variety of settings and contexts readily engage with 
interventions designed to increase communication and 
support, provided they are delivered in a caring and 
respectful manner (high confidence in the evidence) 
(22). The use of women’s groups is likely to fulfil two 
key requirements of ANC from a woman’s perspective – the opportunity to receive and share relevant 
information and the opportunity to develop supportive 
relationships with other women and health-care 
providers (high confidence in the evidence). Evidence 
from women and providers in LMICs also highlighted 
the importance of active community engagement 
in the design and delivery of informational-based 
services, especially in communities where traditional 
beliefs may differ from conventional understandings 
(moderate confidence in the evidence). Qualitative 
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 98
 evidence from providers suggests that there is a 
willingness to supply pregnancy-related information 
and offer psychological/emotional support to women 
provided that resources are available (high confidence 
in the evidence) and the services are delivered in 
a coordinated, organized manner with appropriate 
managerial support (moderate confidence in the 
evidence) (45).
 Feasibility
 Qualitative evidence suggests that, where health-care 
providers are involved in facilitating women’s groups, 
they may need additional training to help with the 
facilitative components and this may be a barrier 
in some resource-poor settings (high confidence in 
the evidence). Similarly, the extra costs associated 
with home visits in terms of additional staff and 
extra resources may limit implementation in some 
LMICs (high confidence in the evidence) (45). It has 
been suggested that community-based interventions 
introduced through existing public sector health 
workers and local health systems may be more 
feasible and more likely to succeed than project
based interventions (200).
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 99
 E.5: Task shifting components of antenatal care delivery
 RECOMMENDATION E.5.1: Task shifting the promotion of health-related behaviours for 
maternal and newborn healtha to a broad range of cadres, including lay health workers, auxiliary 
nurses, nurses, midwives and doctors is recommended. (Recommended)
 RECOMMENDATION E.5.2: Task shifting the distribution of recommended nutritional 
supplements and intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy (IPTp) for malaria prevention 
to a broad range of cadres, including auxiliary nurses, nurses, midwives and doctors is 
recommended. (Recommended)
 Remarks
 • Recommendations E.5.1 and E.5.2 have been adapted and integrated from Optimizing health worker roles to 
improve access to key maternal and newborn health interventions through task shifting (OptimizeMNH) (2012) 
(201).
 • The GDG noted that, while task shifting has an important role to play in allowing flexibility in health-care 
delivery in low-resource settings, policy-makers need to work towards midwife-led care for all women.
 • Lay health workers need to be recognized and integrated into the system, and not be working alone, i.e. 
task shifting needs to occur within a team approach.
 • The mandate of all health workers involved in task shifting programmes needs to be clear.
 • In a separate guideline on HIV testing services (98), WHO recommends that lay providers who are 
trained and supervised can independently conduct safe and effective HIV testing using rapid tests (see 
Recommendation B.1.8).
 • The GDG noted that it may be feasible to task shift antenatal ultrasound to midwives with the appropriate 
training, staffing, mentoring and referral systems in place.
 • Further research is needed on the mechanism of effect of MLCC and whether continuity of care can be 
task shifted.
 • Further information on this recommendation can be found in the OptimizeMNH guideline (201), available 
at: http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/maternal_perinatal_health/978924504843/en/
 a Including promotion of the following: care-seeking behaviour and ANC utilization; birth preparedness and complication readiness; sleeping under insecticide
treated bednets; skilled care for childbirth; companionship in labour and childbirth; nutritional advice; nutritional supplements; HIV testing during pregnancy; 
exclusive breastfeeding; postnatal care and family planning; immunization according to national guidelines.
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 100
 E.6: Recruitment and retention of staff in rural and remote areas
 RECOMMENDATION E.6: Policy-makers should consider educational, regulatory, financial, and 
personal and professional support interventions to recruit and retain qualified health workers in 
rural and remote areas. (Context-specific recommendation)
 Remarks
 • Recommendation E.6 has been adapted and integrated for the ANC guideline from the 2010 WHO 
publication Increasing access to health workers in remote and rural areas through improved retention: global 
policy recommendations (202).
 • Strong recommendations (abridged) on recruitment and staff retention from the above guideline include 
the following.
 –Use targeted admission policies to enrol students with a rural background in education programmes 
for various health disciplines and/or establish a health-care professional school outside of major cities.
 –Revise undergraduate and postgraduate curricula to include rural health topics and clinical rotations in 
rural areas so as to enhance the competencies of health-care professionals working in rural areas.
 –Improve living conditions for health workers and their families and invest in infrastructure and services 
(sanitation, electricity, telecommunications, schools, etc.).
 –Provide a good and safe working environment, including appropriate equipment and supplies, 
supportive supervision and mentoring.
 –Identify and implement appropriate outreach activities to facilitate cooperation between health 
workers from better-served areas and those in underserved areas, and, where feasible, use tele-health 
to provide additional support.
 –Develop and support career development programmes and provide senior posts in rural areas so that 
health workers can move up the career path as a result of experience, education and training, without 
necessarily leaving rural areas.
 –Support the development of professional networks, rural health-care professional associations, 
rural health journals, etc., to improve the morale and status of rural providers and reduce feelings of 
professional isolation.
 –Adopt public recognition measures such as rural health days, awards and titles at local, national and 
international levels to lift the profile of working in rural areas.
 • Conditional educational, regulatory and financial recommendations from this guideline can be found 
in the WHO global policy recommendations document (202), available at: http://www.who.int/hrh/
 retention/guidelines/en/
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 101
 E.7: Antenatal care contact schedules
 RECOMMENDATION E.7: Antenatal care models with a minimum of eight contacts are 
recommended to reduce perinatal mortality and improve women’s experience of care. 
(Recommended)
 Remarks
 • The GDG stresses that the four-visit focused ANC (FANC) model does not offer women adequate 
contact with health-care practitioners and is no longer recommended. With the FANC model, the first 
ANC visit occurs before 12 weeks of pregnancy, the second around 26 weeks, the third around 32 weeks, 
and the fourth between 36 and 38 weeks of gestation. Thereafter, women are advised to return to ANC 
at 41 weeks of gestation or sooner if they experience danger signs. Each ANC visit involves specific goals 
aimed at improving triage and timely referral of high-risk women and includes educational components 
(12). However, up-to-date evidence shows that the FANC model, which was developed in the 1990s, is 
probably associated with more perinatal deaths than models that comprise at least eight ANC visits. 
Furthermore, evidence suggests that more ANC visits, irrespective of the resource setting, is probably 
associated with greater maternal satisfaction than less ANC visits.
 • The GDG prefers the word “contact” to “visit”, as it implies an active connection between a 
pregnant woman and a health-care provider that is not implicit with the word “visit”. In terms of 
the operationalization of this recommendation, “contact” can be adapted to local contexts through 
community outreach programmes and lay health worker involvement.
 • The decision regarding the number of contacts with a health system was also influenced by the following:
 –evidence supporting improving safety during pregnancy through increased frequency of maternal and 
fetal assessment to detect problems;
 –evidence supporting improving health system communication and support around pregnancy for 
women and families;
 –evidence from HIC studies indicating no important differences in maternal and perinatal health 
outcomes between ANC models that included at least eight contacts and ANC models that included 
more (11–15) contacts (203);
 –evidence indicating that more contact between pregnant women and knowledgeable, supportive and 
respectful health-care practitioners is more likely to lead to a positive pregnancy experience.
 • Implementation considerations related to this recommendation and the mapping of guideline 
recommendations to ANC contacts are presented in Chapter 4: Implementation of the ANC guideline and 
recommendations.
 Summary of evidence and considerations
 Effects of the FANC model (with four visits) 
compared with “standard” ANC (with at least 
eight ANC visits planned) (EB Table E.7)
 The evidence on the effects of FANC (the four-visit 
ANC model) was derived from a Cochrane review 
on “reduced-visit” ANC models versus “standard” 
care models (with at least eight ANC visits planned) 
that included seven RCTs (203). Four individual RCTs 
were conducted in HICs (the United Kingdom and the 
USA) and three large cluster-RCTs were conducted in 
LMICs, including one conducted in Argentina, Cuba, 
Saudi Arabia and Thailand (204), and two conducted 
in Zimbabwe. The LMIC trials evaluated the FANC 
model compared with “standard” ANC models that 
planned for at least eight visits (12). Three cluster
RCTs involving more than 50 000 women contributed 
data. The median number of visits achieved in the 
FANC arms of these trials ranged from four to five 
visits and the median number of visits achieved in the 
standard ANC arms ranged from four to eight visits.
 Maternal outcomes
 High-certainty evidence shows that FANC had little 
or no effect on caesarean section rates (1 trial, 24 526 
women; RR: 1.00, 95% CI: 0.89–1.11), and low
certainty evidence suggests that it may make little or 
no difference to maternal mortality (3 trials, 51 504 
women; RR: 1.13, 95% CI: 0.5–2.57).
 With regard to maternal satisfaction, outcomes 
were reported narratively in the review, as data were 
sparse. In a survey conducted among a subset of 
n
 women participating in the WHO trial, fewer women 
were satisfied with the frequency of visits in the 
FANC model than in the standard model (77.4% 
versus 87.2%) and women in the FANC model were 
less likely to be satisfied with the spacing between 
visits compared with the standard model (72.7% 
versus 81%). This evidence was not formally graded 
due to insufficient data.
 Fetal and neonatal outcomes
 Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that FANC 
probably increases perinatal mortality compared 
with “standard” ANC with more visits (3 trials, 51 323 
women; RR: 1.15, 95% CI: 1.01–1.32). Based on this RR, 
the illustrative impact on perinatal mortality rates are 
shown in Box 4.
 Moderate-certainty evidence indicates that FANC 
probably has little or no effect on preterm birth 
(3 trials, 47 094 women; RR: 0.99, 95% CI: 0.91–1.08) 
and low birth weight (3 trials, 46 220 women; 
RR: 1.04, 95% CI: 0.97–1.12) compared with 
“standard” ANC. In addition, low-certainty evidence 
suggests that FANC probably makes little or no 
difference to SGA (3 trials, 43 094 women; RR: 1.01, 
95% CI: 0.88–1.17).
 n
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 Additional considerations
 n The GDG noted that the review authors explored 
reasons for the effect on perinatal mortality and 
the effect persisted in various exploratory analyses.
 n
 n In 2012, the WHO undertook a secondary analysis 
of perinatal mortality data from the WHO FANC 
trial (205). This secondary analysis, which included 
18 365 low-risk and 6160 high-risk women, found 
an increase in the overall risk of perinatal mortality 
between 32 and 36 weeks of gestation with FANC 
compared with “standard” ANC in both low- and 
high-risk populations.
 n It is not clear whether the philosophy of the FANC 
approach, with regard to improving quality of care 
at each ANC visit, was implemented effectively 
in the trials. However, if this element is neglected, 
a poorly executed FANC model may then simply 
represent reduced health provider contact, and 
a reduced opportunity to detect risk factors and 
complications, and to address women’s concerns.
 n
 n The GDG panel considered unpublished findings 
of a two-year audit of perinatal mortality from 
the Mpumalanga region of South Africa that has 
implemented the FANC model (206). The audit 
from September 2013 to August 2015 comprised 
data of 149 308 births of neonates weighing 
more than 1000 g, among which there were 3893 
perinatal deaths (giving a PMR of 24.8 per 1000 
births). Stillbirth risk was plotted according to 
gestational age and three peaks in the occurrence 
of stillbirths were noted, one at around 31 weeks 
of gestation, another at around 37 weeks, and the 
third occurring at 40 weeks or more. When these 
data were compared with stillbirth data from 
another South Africa province, which uses a model 
of ANC that includes fortnightly ANC visits from 
28 weeks of gestation, the latter showed a gradual 
rise in the overall stillbirth risk from 28 weeks, with 
a single (and lower) peak at 40 weeks or more, 
i.e. no additional peaks at 30 and 37 weeks. These 
data are consistent with those from the secondary 
analysis of the WHO trial and suggest that 
additional visits in the third trimester may prevent 
stillbirths.
 n
 n The GDG also considered the evidence from the 
Cochrane review on reduced visit ANC models 
of at least eight visits versus “standard” ANC 
models with 11–15 visits from four RCTs in HICs 
(203). Low-certainty evidence suggested that the 
reduced-visit model (with at least eight visits) 
may be associated with increased preterm birth 
Box 4: Illustration of the impact of focused ANC (FANC) on perinatal mortality rates (PMR)
 Assumed PMR
 (“Standard” ANC)
 Illustrative PMRa
 (FANC model)
 Absolute increase in 
perinatal deaths
 10 deaths per 1000 births
 12 deaths per 1000 births
 (10–13 deaths)
 2 deaths per 1000 births
 (0–3 deaths)
 25 deaths per 1000 births
 29 deaths per 1000 births
 (25–33 deaths)
 4 deaths per 1000 births
 (0–8 deaths)
 50 deaths per 1000 births
 58 deaths per 1000 births
 (50–66 deaths)
 8 deaths per 1000 births
 (0–16 deaths)
 102
 a Based on RR: 1.15, 95% CI: 1.01–1.32.
Values
 (3 trials; RR: 1.24, 1.01–1.52), but no other important 
effects on health outcomes were noted. In general, 
however, evidence from these individual studies 
also suggests that the reduced-visit models may be 
associated with lower women’s satisfaction.
 n
 n The GDG considered unpublished evidence from 
four country case studies (Argentina, Kenya, 
Thailand and the United Republic of Tanzania) 
where the FANC model has been implemented 
(207). Provider compliance was noted to be 
problematic in some settings, as were shortages 
of equipment, supplies and staff. Integration of 
services was found to be particularly challenging, 
especially in settings with a high prevalence of 
endemic infections (e.g. malaria, TB, sexually 
transmitted infections, helminthiasis). Guidance 
on implementation of the FANC model in such 
settings was found to be inadequate, as was the 
amount of time allowed within the four-visit model 
to provide integrated care.
 n
 n Findings on provider compliance from these case 
studies are consistent with published findings from 
rural Burkina Faso, Uganda and the United Republic 
of Tanzania (208). Health-care providers in this 
study were found to variably omit certain practices 
from the FANC model, including blood pressure 
measurement and provision of information on 
danger signs, and to spend less than 15 minutes 
per ANC visit. Such reports suggest that fitting all 
the components of the FANC model into four visits 
is difficult to achieve in some low-resource settings 
where services are already overstretched. In 
addition, in low-resource settings, when the target 
is set at four ANC visits, due to the various barriers 
to ANC use, far fewer than four visits may actually 
be achieved.
 n
 n Programmatic evidence from Ghana and Kenya 
indicates similar levels of satisfaction between 
FANC and standard ANC, with sources of 
dissatisfaction with both models being long 
waiting times and costs associated with care (209, 
210).
 n
 n Emotional and psychosocial needs are variable 
and the needs of vulnerable groups (including 
adolescent girls, displaced and war-affected 
women, women with disabilities, women with 
mental health concerns, women living with HIV, 
sex workers, ethnic and racial minorities, among 
others) can be greater than for other women. 
Therefore, the number and content of visits should 
be adaptable to local context and to the individual 
woman.
 See “Women’s values” at the beginning of section 
3.E: Background (p. 86).
 Resources
 Two trials evaluated cost implications of two 
models of ANC with reduced visits, one in the 
United Kingdom and one in two LMICs (Cuba and 
Thailand). Costs per pregnancy to both women and 
providers were lower with the reduced visits models 
in both settings. Time spent accessing care was also 
significantly shorter with reduced visits models. In the 
United Kingdom trial, there was an increase in costs 
related to neonatal intensive care unit stays in the 
reduced visit model.
 Equity
 Preventable maternal and perinatal mortality is 
highest among disadvantaged populations, which 
are at greater risk of various health problems, such 
as nutritional deficiencies and infections, that 
predispose women to poor pregnancy outcomes. 
This suggests that, in LMICs, more and better quality 
contact between pregnant women with health-care 
providers would help to address health inequalities.
 Acceptability
 Evidence from high-, medium- and low-resource 
settings suggests that women do not like reduced 
visit schedules and would prefer more contact with 
antenatal services (moderate confidence in the 
evidence) (22). Women value the opportunity to build 
supportive relationships during their pregnancy (high 
confidence in the evidence) and for some women, 
especially in LMIC settings, the reduced visit schedule 
may limit their ability to develop these relationships, 
both with health-care professionals and with other 
pregnant women (low confidence in the evidence). 
In some low-income settings where women rely on 
husbands or partners to financially support their 
antenatal visits, the reduced visit schedule limits 
their ability to procure additional finance (low 
confidence in the evidence). However, the reduced 
visit schedule may be appreciated by some women 
in a range of LMIC settings because of the potential 
for cost savings, e.g. loss of domestic income from 
extra clinic attendance and/or associated travel costs 
(low confidence in the evidence). Indirect evidence 
also suggests that women are much more likely to 
engage with antenatal services if care is provided 
by knowledgeable, kind health-care professionals 
who have the time and resources to deliver genuine 
woman-centred care, regardless of the number of 
Chapter 3. Evidence and recommendations 
103
visits (high confidence in the evidence). Specific 
evidence from providers relating to reduced visit 
schedules or the adoption of FANC is sparse and, 
in some LMICs, highlights concerns around the 
availability of equipment and resources, staff 
shortages and inadequate training – issues that 
are pertinent to all models of ANC delivery in low
resource settings.
 Feasibility
 Qualitative evidence suggests that some providers 
in LMICs feel that the reduced visit schedule is a 
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 104
 more efficient use of staff time and is less likely to 
deplete limited supplies of equipment and medicine 
(moderate confidence in the evidence) (45). 
Programme reports from Ghana and Kenya stress 
that inadequate equipment, supplies, infrastructure 
and training may hamper implementation (209, 
210). Providers have also raised concerns about 
the difficulty of incorporating all of the FANC 
components into relatively short appointments, 
especially in LMICs (Burkina Faso, Uganda and the 
United Republic of Tanzania) where services are 
already stretched (208, 211).
4. Implementation of the ANC 
guideline and recommendations: 
introducing the 2016 WHO ANC model
 The ultimate goal of this guideline and its 
recommendations is to improve the quality 
of ANC and to improve maternal, fetal and 
newborn outcomes related to ANC. These ANC 
recommendations need to be deliverable within an 
appropriate model of care that can be adapted to 
different countries, local contexts and the individual 
woman. With the contributions of the members of 
the Guideline Development Group (GDG), WHO 
reviewed existing models of delivering ANC with 
full consideration of the range of interventions 
recommended within this guideline (Chapter 3). 
Recommendation E.7 states that “Antenatal care 
models with a minimum of eight contacts are 
recommended to reduce perinatal mortality and 
improve women’s experience of care”; taking this as 
a foundation, the GDG reviewed how ANC should 
be delivered in terms of both the timing and content 
of each of the ANC contacts, and arrived at a new 
model – the 2016 WHO ANC model – which replaces 
the previous four-visit focused ANC (FANC) model. 
For the purpose of developing this new ANC model, 
the ANC guideline recommendations were mapped to 
the eight contacts based on the evidence supporting 
each recommendation and the optimal timing of 
delivery of the recommended interventions to achieve 
maximal impact.
 The 2016 WHO ANC model recommends a minimum 
of eight ANC contacts, with the first contact 
scheduled to take place in the first trimester (up to 
12 weeks of gestation), two contacts scheduled in the 
second trimester (at 20 and 26 weeks of gestation) 
and five contacts scheduled in the third trimester (at 
30, 34, 36, 38 and 40 weeks). Within this model, the 
word “contact” has been used instead of “visit”, as 
it implies an active connection between a pregnant 
woman and a health-care provider that is not implicit 
with the word “visit”. It should be noted that the list 
of interventions to be delivered at each contact and 
details about where they are delivered and by whom 
(see Table 2) are not meant to be prescriptive but, 
rather, adaptable to the individual woman and the 
local context, to allow flexibility in the delivery of the 
recommended interventions. Different to the FANC 
model, an additional contact is now recommended 
at 20 weeks of gestation, and an additional three 
contacts are recommended in the third trimester 
(defined as the period from 28 weeks of gestation 
up to delivery), since this represents the period of 
greatest antenatal risk for mother and baby (see 
Box 5). At these third-trimester contacts, ANC 
providers should aim to reduce preventable morbidity 
and mortality through systematic monitoring of 
maternal and fetal well-being, particularly in relation 
to hypertensive disorders and other complications 
that may be asymptomatic but detectable during this 
critical period.
 Box 5: Comparing ANC schedules
 WHO FANC 
model
 Visit 1: 8–12 weeks
 2016 WHO ANC 
model
 First trimester
 Contact 1: up to 12 weeks
 Second trimester
 Visit 2: 24–26 weeks
 Contact 2: 20 weeks
 Contact 3: 26 weeks
 Third trimester
 Visit 3: 32 weeks
 Visit 4: 36–38 weeks
 Contact 4: 30 weeks
 Contact 5: 34 weeks
 Contact 6: 36 weeks
 Contact 7: 38 weeks
 Contact 8: 40 weeks
 Return for delivery at 41 weeks if not given birth.
 If the quality of ANC is poor and women’s experience 
of it is negative, the evidence shows that women 
will not attend ANC, irrespective of the number of 
recommended contacts in the ANC model. Thus, 
the overarching aim of the 2016 WHO ANC model 
is to provide pregnant women with respectful, 
105
 Chapter 4. Implementation of the ANC guideline and recommendations
individualized, person-centred care at every 
contact, with implementation of effective clinical 
practices (interventions and tests), and provision of 
relevant and timely information, and psychosocial 
and emotional support, by practitioners with 
good clinical and interpersonal skills within a well 
functioning health system. Effective implementation 
of ANC requires a health systems approach and 
strengthening focusing on continuity of care, 
integrated service delivery, availability of supplies and 
commodities and empowered health-care providers.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 106
 There are many different ways for health system 
planners to optimize ANC delivery by employing 
a range of strategies that can improve the 
utilization and quality of ANC. The health system 
recommendations in this guideline have focused 
mainly on those strategies that address continuity 
of care, and improve communication with, and 
support for, women (Recommendations E.1–E.4). The 
recommendations on task shifting and recruitment of 
staff (Recommendations E.5.1, E.5.2 and E.6) are also 
important, as provider experience and attitudes have 
an impact on the capacity of health systems to deliver 
quality ANC; barriers to provider recruitment and job 
satisfaction will need to be addressed to successfully 
implement this guideline. Such barriers have been 
shown to be significant in LMICs, and can prevent the 
provision of quality midwifery care (212). In addition 
to improving the quality of care, these health system 
recommendations are intended to encourage health 
system planners to operationalize the recommended 
eight ANC contacts in ways that are feasible in the 
local context.
 Table 2 shows the WHO ANC guideline 
recommendations mapped to the eight 
recommended contacts, thus presenting a summary 
framework for the 2016 WHO ANC model in 
support of a positive pregnancy experience. This 
table does not include good clinical practices, 
such as measuring blood pressure, proteinuria 
and weight, checking for fetal heart sounds, which 
would be included as part of an implementation 
manual aimed at practitioners. Practices that are 
not recommended have been included in the table 
for informational purposes and highlighted in grey. 
Context-specific recommendations for which rigorous 
research is required before they can be considered 
for implementation have not been mapped to the 
schedule of contacts.
 Any intervention that is missed at an ANC contact, 
for any reason, should in principle be included at the 
next contact. Effective communication should be 
facilitated at all ANC contacts, to cover: presence of 
any symptoms; promotion of healthy pregnancies and 
newborns through lifestyle choices; individualized 
advice and support; timely information on tests, 
supplements and treatments; birth-preparedness and 
complication-readiness planning; postnatal family 
planning options; and the timing and purpose of ANC 
contacts. Topics for individualized advice and support 
can include healthy eating, physical activity, nutrition, 
tobacco, substance use, caffeine intake, physiological 
symptoms, malaria and HIV prevention, and blood 
test results and retests. Communication should occur 
in a respectful, individualized and person-centred 
way. An effective referral system and emergency 
transport are also essential components of this ANC 
model.
 Within the 2016 WHO ANC model, there are two 
opportunities to arrange a single early ultrasound 
scan (i.e. before 24 weeks of gestation): either at 
the first contact (up to 12 weeks of gestation) or at 
the second contact (20 weeks). The GDG suggests 
this pragmatic approach in order to increase the 
proportion of pregnancies with accurate gestational 
age assessments, especially in settings where 
ANC utilization is historically low; lack of accurate 
gestational age assessment can compromise the 
diagnosis and/or management of complications (such 
as preterm birth and pre-eclampsia). It is important 
to highlight that the frequency and exact timing of 
some of these ANC practices and interventions – 
especially related to malaria, tuberculosis and HIV – may need to be adapted, based on the local context, 
population and health system. Please refer to Box 6 
at the end of this chapter for considerations related 
to the adoption, scale-up and implementation of the 
2016 WHO ANC model.
 The GDG agreed that implementation of the 2016 
WHO ANC model should not wait for a large 
multicentre trial to be conducted to determine the 
optimal number of contacts, or the impact of the 
additional recommended interventions, such as 
ultrasound, on pregnancy outcomes, resources, 
equity and the other domains; rather, following 
implementation of the model, it should be subject 
to ongoing monitoring and evaluation. It should 
be remembered that the four-visit model has 
significantly increased stillbirth risk compared 
to standard models with eight or more contacts. 
Understandably, policy-makers and health-care 
providers might feel that an increase in the number of 
ANC contacts with an emphasis on quality of care will 
increase the burden on already overstretched health 
systems. However, the GDG agreed that there is likely 
to be little impact on lives saved or improved without 
substantial investment in improving the quality 
of ANC services provided in LMICs. International 
human rights law requires that States use “maximum 
available resources” to realize economic, social and 
cultural rights, which includes women’s rights to 
sexual and reproductive health (1). Ensuring that 
women’s rights to sexual and reproductive health are 
supported requires meeting standards with regard 
to the availability, accessibility, acceptability and 
quality of health-care facilities, supplies and services 
(1). Specifically, in addition to other health system 
strengthening initiatives, investment is urgently 
needed to address the shortage and training of 
midwives and other health-care providers able to 
offer ANC. Such investment should be considered a 
top priority as quality health care around pregnancy 
and childbirth has far-reaching benefits for 
individuals, families, communities and countries.
 107
 Chapter 4. Implementation of the ANC guideline and recommendations
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 108
 a. A healthy diet contains adequate energy, protein, vitamins and minerals, obtained through the consumption of a variety of foods, including green and orange vegetables, meat, fish, beans, nuts, whole grains and fruit.
 b. The equivalent of 60 mg of elemental iron is 300 mg of ferrous sulfate hepahydrate, 180 mg of ferrous fumarate or 500 mg of ferrous gluconate.
 c. Folic acid should be commenced as early as possible (ideally before conception) to prevent neural tube defects.
 d. This recommendation supersedes the previous recommendation found in the 2012 WHO publication Guideline: daily iron and folic acid supplementation in pregnant women (36).
 Table 2: The 2016 WHO ANC model for a positive pregnancy experience: recommendations mapped to eight scheduled ANC contacts
 Overarching aim: To provide pregnant women with respectful, individualized, person-centred care at every contact, with implementation of effective clinical practices (interventions and tests), and provision of relevant 
and timely information, and psychosocial and emotional support, by practitioners with good clinical and interpersonal skills within a well functioning health system.
 Notes:
 • These recommendations apply to pregnant women and adolescent girls within the context of routine ANC.
 • This table does not include good clinical practices, such as measuring blood pressure, proteinuria and weight, and checking for fetal heart sounds, which would be included as part of an implementation manual aimed 
at practitioners.
 • Remarks detailed in the shaded box with each recommendation should be taken into account when planning the implementation of these recommendations.
 Type of 
intervention
 Recommendation Type of 
recommendation
 Eight scheduled ANC contacts  
(weeks of gestation)
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
 (12 
weeks)
 (20 
weeks)
 (26 
weeks)
 (30 
weeks)
 (34 
weeks)
 (36 
weeks)
 (38 
weeks)
 (40 
weeks)
 A. Nutritional interventions
 Dietary 
interventions
 A.1.1: Counselling about healthy eating and keeping physically active 
during pregnancy is recommended for pregnant women to stay 
healthy and to prevent excessive weight gain during pregnancy.a
 Recommended X X X X X X X X
 A.1.2: In undernourished populations, nutrition education on 
increasing daily energy and protein intake is recommended for 
pregnant women to reduce the risk of low-birth-weight neonates.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X X X X X X X X
 A.1.3: In undernourished populations, balanced energy and protein 
dietary supplementation is recommended for pregnant women to 
reduce the risk of stillbirths and small-for-gestational-age neonates.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X X X X X X X X
 A.1.4: In undernourished populations, high-protein supplementation 
is not recommended for pregnant women to improve maternal and 
perinatal outcomes.
 Not recommended
 Iron and folic acid 
supplements
 A.2.1: Daily oral iron and folic acid  
supplementation with 30 mg to 60 mg of elemental ironb and 400 µg 
(0.4 mg) of folic acidc is recommended for pregnant women to 
prevent maternal anaemia, puerperal sepsis, low birth weight, and 
preterm birth.d
 Recommended X X X X X X X X
109 Chapter 4. Implementation of the ANC guideline and recommendations
 e. The equivalent of 120 mg of elemental iron equals 600 mg of ferrous sulfate heptahydrate, 360 mg of ferrous fumarate or 1000 mg of ferrous gluconate.
 f. This recommendation supersedes the previous recommendation in the 2012 WHO publication Guideline: intermittent iron and folic acid supplementation in non-anaemic pregnant women (55).
 g. This recommendation is consistent with the 2011 WHO recommendations for prevention and treatment of pre-eclampsia and eclampsia (57) and supersedes the previous recommendation found in the 2013 WHO 
publication Guideline: calcium supplementation in pregnant women (38).
 h. Vitamin A deficiency is a severe public health problem if  5% of women in a population have a history of night blindness in their most recent pregnancy in the previous 3–5 years that ended in a live birth, or if 
 20% of pregnant women have a serum retinol level < 0.70 µmol/L. Determination of vitamin A deficiency as a public health problem involves estimating the prevalence of deficiency in a population by using 
specific biochemical and clinical indicators of vitamin A status.
 i. This recommendation supersedes the previous recommendation found in the 2011 WHO publication Guideline: vitamin A supplementation in pregnant women (60).
 Type of 
intervention
 Recommendation Type of 
recommendation
 Eight scheduled ANC contacts  
(weeks of gestation)
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
 (12 
weeks)
 (20 
weeks)
 (26 
weeks)
 (30 
weeks)
 (34 
weeks)
 (36 
weeks)
 (38 
weeks)
 (40 
weeks)
 Iron and folic acid 
supplements
 A.2.2: Intermittent oral iron and folic acid supplementation with 120 
mg of elemental irone and 2800 µg (2.8 mg) of folic acid once weekly 
is recommended for pregnant women to improve maternal and 
neonatal outcomes if daily iron is not acceptable due to side-effects, 
and in populations with an anaemia prevalence among pregnant 
women of less than 20%.f
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X X X X X X X X
 Calcium 
supplements
 A.3: In populations with low dietary calcium intake, daily calcium 
supplementation (1.5–2.0 g oral elemental calcium)  
is recommended for pregnant women to reduce the risk of  
pre-eclampsia.g
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X X X X X X X X
 Vitamin A 
supplements
 A.4: Vitamin A supplementation is only recommended for pregnant 
women in areas where vitamin A deficiency is a severe public health 
problem,h to prevent night blindness.i
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X X X X X X X X
 Zinc supplements A.5: Zinc supplementation for pregnant women is only recommended 
in the context of rigorous research.
 Context-specific 
recommendation 
(research)
 Multiple 
micronutrient 
supplements
 A.6: Multiple micronutrient supplementation is not recommended for 
pregnant women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes.
 Not recommended
 Vitamin B6 
(pyridoxine) 
supplements
 A.7: Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) supplementation is not recommended 
for pregnant women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes.
 Not recommended
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 110
 j. This recommendation supersedes the previous recommendation found in the 2012 WHO publication Guideline: vitamin D supplementation in pregnant women (75).
 k. This includes any product, beverage or food containing caffeine (i.e. brewed coffee, tea, cola-type soft drinks, caffeinated energy drinks, chocolate, caffeine tablets).
 l. Evidence on essential ANC activities, such as measuring maternal blood pressure, proteinuria and weight, and checking for fetal heart sounds, was not assessed by the GDG as these activities are considered to be 
part of good clinical practice.
 Type of 
intervention
 Recommendation Type of 
recommendation
 Eight scheduled ANC contacts  
(weeks of gestation)
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
 (12 
weeks)
 (20 
weeks)
 (26 
weeks)
 (30 
weeks)
 (34 
weeks)
 (36 
weeks)
 (38 
weeks)
 (40 
weeks)
 Vitamin E and C 
supplements
 A.8: Vitamin E and C supplementation is not recommended for 
 pregnant women to improve  maternal and perinatal outcomes.
 Not recommended
 Vitamin D 
supplements
 A.9: Vitamin D supplementation is not recommended for pregnant 
women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes.j
 Not recommended
 Restricting 
caffeine intake
 A.10.1: For pregnant women with high daily caffeine intake (more than 
300 mg per day),k lowering daily caffeine intake during pregnancy 
is recommended to reduce the risk of pregnancy loss and low-birth
weight neonates.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X X X X X X X X
 B. Maternal and fetal assessment l
 Anaemia B.1.1: Full blood count testing is the recommended method for 
diagnosing anaemia in pregnancy. In settings where full blood 
count testing is not available, on-site haemoglobin testing with a 
haemoglobinometer is recommended over the use of the haemoglobin 
colour scale as the method for diagnosing anaemia in pregnancy.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X X X
 Asymptomatic 
bacteriuria (ASB)
 B.1.2: Midstream urine culture is the recommended method for 
diagnosing asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB) in pregnancy. In settings 
where urine culture is not available, on-site midstream urine Gram
staining is recommended over the use of dipstick tests as the method 
for diagnosing ASB in pregnancy.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X X X
111 Chapter 4. Implementation of the ANC guideline and recommendations
 m. Minimum requirements are: a protocol/standard operating procedure; training on how to ask about IPV, and on how to provide the minimum response or beyond; private setting; confidentiality ensured; system for 
referral in place; and time to allow for appropriate disclosure.
 n. This recommendation is consistent with the 2013 publication Responding to intimate partner violence and sexual violence against women: WHO clinical and policy guidelines (86).
 o. This is not a recommendation on routine screening for hyperglycaemia in pregnancy. It has been adapted and integrated from the 2013 WHO publication Diagnostic criteria and classification of hyperglycaemia 
first detected in pregnancy (94), which states that GDM should be diagnosed at any time in pregnancy if one or more of the following criteria are met: 
• fasting plasma glucose 5.1–6.9 mmol/L (92–125 mg/dL)
 • 1-hour plasma glucose  10.0 mmol/L (180 mg/dL) following a 75 g oral glucose load
 • 2-hour plasma glucose 8.5–11.0 mmol/L (153–199 mg/dL) following a 75 g oral glucose load.
 Diabetes mellitus in pregnancy should be diagnosed if one or more of the following criteria are met: 
• fasting plasma glucose  7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL)
 • 2-hour plasma glucose  11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) following a 75 g oral glucose load 
• random plasma glucose  11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) in the presence of diabetes symptoms.
 p. Integrated from the 2013 publication WHO recommendations for the prevention and management of tobacco use and second-hand smoke exposure in pregnancy (96).
 q. Integrated from the 2014 WHO publication Guidelines for the identification and management of substance use and substance use disorders in pregnancy (97).
 Type of 
intervention
 Recommendation Type of 
recommendation
 Eight scheduled ANC contacts  
(weeks of gestation)
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
 (12 
weeks)
 (20 
weeks)
 (26 
weeks)
 (30 
weeks)
 (34 
weeks)
 (36 
weeks)
 (38 
weeks)
 (40 
weeks)
 Intimate partner 
violence (IPV)
 B.1.3: Clinical enquiry about the possibility of intimate partner 
violence (IPV) should be strongly considered at antenatal care visits 
when assessing conditions that may be caused or complicated by 
IPV in order to improve clinical diagnosis and subsequent care, 
where there is the capacity to provide a supportive response 
(including referral where appropriate) and where the WHO minimum 
requirements are met.m n
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X X X X X X X X
 Gestational 
diabetes mellitus 
(GDM)
 B.1.4: Hyperglycaemia first detected at any time during pregnancy 
should be classified as either, gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) or 
diabetes mellitus in pregnancy, according to WHO 2013 criteria.o
 Recommended X X X X X X X X
 Tobacco use B.1.5: Health-care providers should ask all pregnant women about 
their tobacco use (past and present) and exposure to second-hand 
smoke as early as possible in the pregnancy and at every antenatal 
care visit.p
 Recommended X X X X X X X X
 Substance use B.1.6: Health-care providers should ask all pregnant women about 
their use of alcohol and other substances (past and present) as early 
as possible in the pregnancy and at every antenatal care visit.q
 Recommended X X X X X X X X
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 112
 r. High-prevalence settings are defined in the 2015 WHO publication Consolidated guidelines on HIV testing services as settings with greater than 5% HIV prevalence in the population being tested (98). Low-prevalence 
settings are those with less than 5% HIV prevalence in the population being tested. In settings with a generalized or concentrated HIV epidemic, retesting of HIV-negative women should be performed in the third 
trimester because of the high risk of acquiring HIV infection during pregnancy; please refer to Recommendation B.1.7 for details.
 s. Adapted and integrated from the 2015 WHO publication Consolidated guidelines on HIV testing services (98).
 t. Adapted and integrated from the 2013 WHO publication Systematic screening for active tuberculosis: principles and recommendations (105).
 u. Cardiotocography (CTG) is a continuous recording of the fetal heart rate and uterine contractions obtained via an ultrasound transducer placed on the mother’s abdomen.
 Type of 
intervention
 Recommendation Type of 
recommendation
 Eight scheduled ANC contacts  
(weeks of gestation)
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
 (12 
weeks)
 (20 
weeks)
 (26 
weeks)
 (30 
weeks)
 (34 
weeks)
 (36 
weeks)
 (38 
weeks)
 (40 
weeks)
 Human  
immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) and 
syphilis
 B.1.7: In high prevalence settings,r provider-initiated testing and 
counselling (PITC) for HIV should be considered a routine component 
of the package of care for pregnant women in all antenatal care 
settings. In low-prevalence settings, PITC can be considered for 
pregnant women in antenatal care as a key component of the effort to 
eliminate mother-to-child transmission of HIV, and to integrate HIV 
testing with syphilis, viral or other key tests, as relevant to the setting, 
and to strengthen the underlying maternal and child health systems.s
 Recommended X
 Tuberculosis (TB) B.1.8: In settings where the tuberculosis (TB) prevalence in the 
general population is 100/100 000 population or higher, systematic 
screening for active TB should be considered for pregnant women as 
part of antenatal care.t
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X
 Daily fetal 
movement 
counting
 B.2.1: Daily fetal movement counting, such as with “count-to-ten” kick 
charts, is only recommended in the context of rigorous research.
 Context-specific 
recommendation 
(research)
 Symphysis-fundal 
height (SFH) 
measurement
 B.2.2: Replacing abdominal palpation with symphysis-fundal height 
(SFH) measurement for the assessment of fetal growth is not 
recommended to improve perinatal outcomes. A change from what 
is usually practiced (abdominal palpation or SFH measurement) in a 
particular setting is not recommended.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X X X X X X X X
 Antenatal cardio
tocography
 B.2.3: Routine antenatal cardiotocographyu is not recommended for 
pregnant women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes.
 Not recommended
113 Chapter 4. Implementation of the ANC guideline and recommendations
 Type of 
intervention
 Recommendation Type of 
recommendation
 Eight scheduled ANC contacts  
(weeks of gestation)
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
 (12 
weeks)
 (20 
weeks)
 (26 
weeks)
 (30 
weeks)
 (34 
weeks)
 (36 
weeks)
 (38 
weeks)
 (40 
weeks)
 Ultrasound scan B.2.4: One ultrasound scan before 24 weeks of gestation (early 
ultrasound) is recommended for pregnant women to estimate 
gestational age, improve detection of fetal anomalies and multiple 
pregnancies, reduce induction of labour for post-term pregnancy, and 
improve a woman’s pregnancy experience.
 Recommended X X
 Doppler 
ultrasound of fetal 
blood vessels
 B.2.5: Routine Doppler ultrasound examination is not recommended 
for pregnant women to improve maternal and perinatal outcomes.v
 Not recommended
 C. Preventive measures
 Antibiotics for 
asymptomatic 
bacteriuria (ASB)
 C.1: A seven-day antibiotic regimen is recommended for all pregnant 
women with asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB) to prevent persistent 
bacteriuria, preterm birth and low birth weight.
 Recommended X X X
 Antibiotic 
prophylaxis to 
prevent recurrent 
urinary tract 
infections
 C.2: Antibiotic prophylaxis is only recommended to prevent recurrent 
urinary tract infections in pregnant women in the context of rigorous 
research.
 Context-specific 
recommendation 
(research)
 Antenatal anti-D 
immunoglobulin 
administration
 C.3: Antenatal prophylaxis with anti-D immunoglobulin in non
sensitized Rh-negative pregnant women at 28 and 34 weeks of 
gestation to prevent RhD alloimmunization is only recommended in 
the context of rigorous research.
 Context-specific 
recommendation 
(research)
 Preventive 
anthelminthic 
treatment
 C.4: In endemic areasw, preventive anthelminthic treatment is 
recommended for pregnant women after the first trimester as part of 
worm infection reduction programmes.x
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X
 v. Doppler ultrasound technology evaluates umbilical artery (and other fetal arteries) waveforms to assess fetal well-being in the third trimester of pregnancy.
 w. Areas with greater than 20% prevalence of infection with any soil-transmitted helminths.
 x. Consistent with the 2016 WHO publication Guideline: preventive chemotherapy to control soil-transmitted helminth infections in high-risk groups (140).
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 114
 Type of 
intervention
 Recommendation Type of 
recommendation
 Eight scheduled ANC contacts  
(weeks of gestation)
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
 (12 
weeks)
 (20 
weeks)
 (26 
weeks)
 (30 
weeks)
 (34 
weeks)
 (36 
weeks)
 (38 
weeks)
 (40 
weeks)
 Tetanus toxoid 
vaccination
 C.5: Tetanus toxoid vaccination is recommended for all pregnant 
women, depending on previous tetanus vaccination exposure, to 
prevent neonatal mortality from tetanus.y
 Recommended X
 Malaria 
prevention: 
Intermittent 
preventive 
treatment in 
pregnancy (IPTp)
 C.6: In malaria-endemic areas in Africa, intermittent preventive 
treatment with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (IPTp-SP) is 
recommended for all pregnant women. Dosing should start in the 
second trimester, and doses should be given at least one month apart, 
with the objective of ensuring that at least three doses are received.z
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X
 (13 
weeks)
 X X X X X
 Pre-exposure 
prophylaxis for 
HIV prevention
 C.7: Oral pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) containing tenofovir  
disoproxil fumarate (TDF) should be offered as an additional 
prevention choice for pregnant women at substantial risk of HIV 
infection as part of combination prevention approaches.aa
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X
 D. Interventions for common physiological symptoms
 Nausea and 
vomiting
 D.1: Ginger, chamomile, vitamin B6 and/or acupuncture are 
recommended for the relief of nausea in early pregnancy, based on a 
woman’s preferences and available options.
 Recommended X X X
 Heartburn D.2: Advice on diet and lifestyle is recommended to prevent and 
relieve heartburn in pregnancy. Antacid preparations can be used to 
women with troublesome symptoms that are not relieved by lifestyle 
modification.
 Recommended X X X X X X X X
 y. This recommendation is consistent with the 2006 WHO guideline on Maternal immunization against tetanus (134). The dosing schedule depends on the previous tetanus vaccination exposure; please refer to 
Recommendation C.5 for details.
 z. Integrated from the 2015 WHO publication Guidelines for the treatment of malaria, which also states: “WHO recommends that, in areas of moderate-to-high malaria transmission of Africa, IPTp-SP be given to 
all pregnant women at each scheduled antenatal care visit, starting as early as possible in the second trimester, provided that the doses of SP are given at least 1 month apart. WHO recommends a package of 
interventions for preventing malaria during pregnancy, which includes promotion and use of insecticide-treated nets, as well as IPTp-SP” (153). To ensure that pregnant women in endemic areas start IPTp-SP as 
early as possible in the second trimester, policy-makers should ensure health system contact with women at 13 weeks of gestation.
 aa. Integrated from the 2015 WHO publication Guideline on when to start antiretroviral therapy and on pre-exposure prophylaxis for HIV (99). Substantial risk of HIV infection is defined by an incidence of HIV infection in 
the absence of PrEP that is sufficiently high (> 3% incidence) to make offering PrEP potentially cost-saving (or cost–effective). Offering PrEP to people at substantial risk of HIV infection maximizes the benefits 
relative to the risks and costs.
115 Chapter 4. Implementation of the ANC guideline and recommendations
 Type of 
intervention
 Recommendation Type of 
recommendation
 Eight scheduled ANC contacts  
(weeks of gestation)
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
 (12 
weeks)
 (20 
weeks)
 (26 
weeks)
 (30 
weeks)
 (34 
weeks)
 (36 
weeks)
 (38 
weeks)
 (40 
weeks)
 Leg cramps D.3: Magnesium, calcium or non-pharmacological treatment options 
can be used for the relief of leg cramps in pregnancy, based on a 
woman’s preferences and available options.
 Recommended X X X X X X X X
 Low back and 
pelvic pain
 D.4: Regular exercise throughout pregnancy is recommended to 
prevent low back and pelvic pain. There are a number of different 
treatment options that can be used, such as physiotherapy, support 
belts and acupuncture, based on a woman’s preferences and available 
options.
 Recommended X X X X X X X X
 Constipation D.5: Wheat bran or other fibre supplements can be used to relieve 
constipation in pregnancy if the condition fails to respond to dietary 
modification, based on a woman’s preferences and available options.
 Recommended X X X X X X X X
 Varicose veins and 
oedema
 D.6: Non-pharmacological options, such as compression stockings, 
leg elevation and water immersion, can be used for the management 
of varicose veins and oedema in pregnancy, based on a woman’s 
preferences and available options.
 Recommended X X X X X X X X
 E: Health systems interventions to improve utilization and quality of antenatal care
 Woman-held case 
notes
 E.1: It is recommended that each pregnant woman carries her own 
case notes during pregnancy to improve continuity, quality of care and 
her pregnancy experience.
 Recommended X X X X X X X X
 Midwife-led 
continuity of care
 E.2: Midwife-led continuity of care models, in which a known midwife 
or small group of known midwives supports a woman throughout the 
antenatal, intrapartum and postnatal continuum, are recommended 
for pregnant women in settings with well functioning midwifery 
programmes.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X X X X X X X X
 Group antenatal 
care
 E.3: Group antenatal care provided by qualified health-care 
professionals may be offered as an alternative to individual antenatal 
care for pregnant women in the context of rigorous research, depending 
on a woman’s preferences and provided that the infrastructure and 
resources for delivery of group antenatal care are available.
 Context-specific 
recommendation 
(research)
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 116
 Type of 
intervention
 Recommendation Type of 
recommendation
 Eight scheduled ANC contacts  
(weeks of gestation)
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
 (12 
weeks)
 (20 
weeks)
 (26 
weeks)
 (30 
weeks)
 (34 
weeks)
 (36 
weeks)
 (38 
weeks)
 (40 
weeks)
 Community-based 
interventions to 
improve  
communication 
and support
 E.4.1: The implementation of community mobilization through 
facilitated participatory learning and action (PLA) cycles with women’s 
groups is recommended to improve maternal and newborn health, 
particularly in rural settings with low access to health services.ab  
Participatory women’s groups represent an opportunity for women to 
discuss their needs during pregnancy, including barriers to reaching 
care, and to increase support to pregnant women.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X X X X X X X X
 E.4.2: Packages of interventions that include household and 
community mobilization and antenatal home visits are recommended 
to improve antenatal care utilization and perinatal health outcomes, 
particularly in rural settings with low access to health services.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X X X X X X X X
 Task shifting 
components of  
antenatal care 
deliveryac
 E.5.1: Task shifting the promotion of health-related behaviours for 
maternal and newborn healthad to a broad range of cadres, including 
lay health workers, auxiliary nurses, nurses, midwives and doctors is 
recommended.
 Recommended X X X X X X X X
 E.5.2: Task shifting the distribution of recommended nutritional 
supplements and intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy 
(IPTp) for malaria prevention to a broad range of cadres, including 
auxiliary nurses, nurses, midwives and doctors is recommended.
 Recommended X X X X X X X X
 Recruitment and 
retention of staff 
in rural and remote 
areasae
 E.6: Policy-makers should consider educational, regulatory, financial, 
and personal and professional support interventions to recruit and 
retain qualified health workers in rural and remote areas.
 Context-specific 
recommendation
 X X X X X X X X
 Antenatal care 
contact schedules
 E.7: Antenatal care models with a minimum of eight contacts are 
recommended to reduce perinatal mortality and improve women’s 
experience of care.
 Recommended X X X X X X X X
 ab. Integrated from the 2014 publication WHO recommendations on community mobilization through facilitated participatory learning and action cycles with women’s groups for maternal and newborn health (183). 
ac. Including promotion of the following: care-seeking behaviour and ANC utilization; birth preparedness and complication readiness; sleeping under insecticide-treated bednets; skilled care for childbirth; 
companionship in labour and childbirth; nutritional advice; nutritional supplements; other context-specific supplements and interventions; HIV testing during pregnancy; exclusive breastfeeding; postnatal care and 
family planning; immunization according to national guidelines.
 ad. Recommendations adapted and integrated from the 2012 WHO guideline on Optimizing health worker roles to improve access to key maternal and newborn health interventions through task shifting (OptimizeMNH) (201).
 ae. Adapted and integrated from the 2010 WHO publication Increasing access to health workers in remote and rural areas through improved retention: global policy recommendations (202).
Box 6: Considerations for the adoption, scale-up and implementation of the 2016 WHO ANC 
model 
n
 Health policy considerations for adoption and scale-up of the model
 n There needs to be a firm government commitment to scale up implementation of ANC services to 
achieve national coverage at health-care facilitates; national support must be secured for the whole 
package rather than for specific components, to avoid fragmentation of services.
 n
 n In low-income countries, donors may play a significant role in scaling up the implementation of the 
model. Sponsoring mechanisms that support domestically driven processes to scale up the whole model 
are more likely to be helpful than mechanisms that support only a part of the package.
 n
 n
 n To set the policy agenda, to secure broad anchoring and to ensure progress in policy formulation and 
decision-making, stakeholders should be targeted among both elected and bureaucratic officials. In 
addition, representatives of training facilities and the relevant medical specialties should be included in 
participatory processes at all stages, including prior to an actual policy decision, to secure broad support 
for scaling-up.
 n To facilitate negotiations and planning, information on the expected impact of the model on users, 
providers (e.g. workload, training requirements) and costs should be assessed and disseminated.
 n
 n The model must be adapted to local contexts and service-delivery settings.
 n
 Health system or organizational-level considerations for implementation of the model
 n Introduction of the model should involve pre-service training institutions and professional bodies, so that 
training curricula for ANC can be updated as quickly and smoothly as possible.
 n
 n Long-term planning is needed for resource generation and budget allocation to strengthen and sustain 
high-quality ANC services.
 n
 n
 n In-service training and supervisory models will need to be developed according to health-care providers’ 
professional requirements, considering the content, duration and procedures for the selection of 
providers for training. These models can also be explicitly designed to address staff turnover, particularly 
in low-resource settings.
 n Standardized tools will need to be developed for supervision, ensuring that supervisors are able to 
support and enable health-care providers to deliver integrated, comprehensive ANC services.
 n A strategy for task shifting may need to be developed to optimize the use of human resources.
 n
 n
 n Tools or “job aids” for ANC implementation (e.g. ANC cards) will need to be simplified and updated with 
all key information in accordance with the model.
 n
 n Strategies will need to be devised to improve supply chain management according to local requirements, 
such as developing protocols for the procedures of obtaining and maintaining the stock of supplies, 
encouraging providers to collect and monitor data on the stock levels and strengthening the provider
level coordination and follow-up of medicines and health-care supplies required for implementation of 
the ANC model.
 n
 User-level considerations for implementation of the model
 n Community-sensitizing activities should be undertaken to disseminate information about the importance 
of each component of ANC, and pregnant women’s right to attend ANC for their health and the health 
of their unborn baby. This information should provide details about the timing and content of the 
recommended ANC contacts, and about the expected user fees.
 n
 n It may be possible to reduce waiting times by reorganizing ANC services and/or client flow.
 For specific implementation considerations related to the individual recommendations, see Annex 4.
 117
 Chapter 4. Implementation of the ANC guideline and recommendations
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 118
 Box 7: Priority research questions, by type of intervention
 A. Nutritional interventions
 • What are the effects, feasibility, acceptability and equity implications of healthy eating and exercise interventions 
in LMICs?
 • Can an intervention package with standardized guidance on nutrition be developed that is evidence-based, 
sustainable, reproducible, accessible and adaptable to different cultural settings?
 • Research is needed at country level to better understand the context-specific etiology of under-nutrition. Do 
alternatives to energy and protein supplements, such as cash or vouchers for pregnant women, or improved local 
and national food production and distribution, lead to improved maternal and perinatal outcomes?
 • What is the most effective, acceptable and feasible regimen of recommended supplements (iron, calcium and 
folic acid)? Could micronutrients be combined into a single, or slow-release, formulation? To what extent do iron 
and calcium (or zinc) supplements compete for absorption?
 • What is the most cost-effective iron compound and formulation (coated versus not) in terms of benefits and side
effects?
 • Can a rapid, portable, less invasive, and field-friendly test for iron deficiency anaemia be developed?
 • Are there haemoconcentration risks associated with haemoglobin concentrations of more than 130 g/L in 
pregnancy?
 • What are the biological mechanisms underlying the relationships among calcium supplementation, pre
eclampsia, HELLP syndrome (haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelet count) and preterm birth?
 • What is the minimal dose and optimal commencement schedule for calcium supplementation to achieve a 
positive effect on pre-eclampsia and preterm birth?
 • What is the effect of zinc supplementation on maternal outcomes (e.g. infections) and perinatal outcomes (e.g. 
preterm birth, SGA, neonatal infections, perinatal morbidity)? What is the optimal dose of zinc supplementation 
in pregnancy, particularly in zinc-deficient populations with no food fortification strategy in place?
 • Does vitamin C reduce PROM and improve maternal and perinatal outcomes?
 • Does vitamin D increase the risk of preterm birth when it’s combined with calcium?
 B. Maternal and fetal assessment
 • Can better and more cost–effective on-site tests to diagnose anaemia be developed?
 • What are the effects of on-site urine testing (dipsticks or Gram stain) with antibiotic treatment for ASB versus 
urine testing plus culture confirmation of urine test, followed by ASB treatment if indicated, on pregnancy and 
other relevant outcomes, including equity, acceptability, feasibility and antimicrobial resistance?
 • Can better on-site tests to diagnose ASB be developed to improve accuracy and feasibility of ASB testing and 
reduce overtreatment of ASB? What is the threshold prevalence of ASB at which targeted testing and treatment 
rather than universal testing and treatment might be a more effective strategy?
 • Which strategies to enquire about and manage IPV are the most effective? Do interventions to enquire about IPV 
have an impact on ANC attendance? Can interventions focusing on partners prevent IPV? Does enquiry about 
IPV (with appropriate referral) have an impact on maternal and perinatal outcomes?
 5. Research implications
 During the guideline development process, the 
Guideline Development Group (GDG) identified 
important knowledge gaps that need to be addressed 
through primary research. The certainty of evidence 
was rated as “low” or “very low” for a number of 
interventions evaluated. According to GRADE 
methodology (15), this implies that further research 
on interventions with “low” or “very low” certainty 
evidence for important outcomes is likely to have 
an impact on future certainty and subsequent 
recommendations related to these interventions. The 
GDG identified knowledge gaps based on this concept 
and prioritized related research questions according to 
whether further research would be likely to promote 
equity, be feasible to implement, and contribute to 
improvements in the pregnancy experience of women. 
In Box 7, priority research questions are grouped 
according to the grouping of the recommendations in 
this ANC guideline (i.e. types of interventions) and are 
listed in a similar order to the recommendations.
119 5. Research implications
 • What is the prevalence of GDM and diabetes mellitus in pregnancy, according to the new criteria, in various 
populations and ethnic groups? What are the best screening strategies for GDM and what are the prevalence 
thresholds at which these are cost-effective?
 • What is the effect of daily fetal movement counting, such as the use of “count-to-ten” kick charts, in the third 
trimester of pregnancy on perinatal outcomes in LMICs?
 • What are the effects and accuracy of SFH measurement to detect abnormal fetal growth and other risk factors for 
perinatal morbidity (e.g. multiple pregnancy, polyhydramnios) in settings without routine ultrasound?
 • Can a single routine Doppler ultrasound examination of fetal blood vessels for all pregnant women in the third 
trimester accurately detect or predict pregnancy complications, particularly IUGR and pre-eclampsia, and lead to 
improved pregnancy outcomes?
 C. Preventive measures
 • What are the effects of prophylactic antibiotics to prevent RUTI in pregnancy, compared to monitoring with use of 
antibiotics only when indicated, on maternal infections, perinatal morbidity and antimicrobial drug resistance?
 • What is the prevalence of Rh alloimmunization and associated poor outcomes among pregnant women in LMIC 
settings? Can cost-effective strategies be developed to manage this condition in LMICS and improve equity?
 D. Interventions for common physiological symptoms
 • What is the prevalence of common physiological symptoms among pregnant women in low-resource settings, 
and can the offer of treatment of these symptoms reduce health inequality, improve ANC coverage and improve 
women’s pregnancy experiences?
 • What is the etiology of leg cramps in pregnancy, and does treatment with magnesium and/or calcium relieve 
symptoms?
 E. Health systems interventions to improve utilization and quality of ANC
 • What should be included in women-held case notes, and how can discrepancies across different records be 
reduced to improve quality of care?
 • What is the pathway of influence of midwife-led continuity of care (MLCC)? Is it specifically the continuity, 
the provider–client relationship or the midwifery philosophy that leads to better health outcomes and 
maternal satisfaction? Can this effect be replicated with other cadres of health-care providers, e.g. auxiliary 
nurse midwives, nurses, family doctors, etc.? How can ANC in LMICs be structured to incorporate the active 
ingredients of MLCC, particularly in settings where the number of midwives is very limited?
 • What are the effects, feasibility and resource implications of MLCC in LMICs? Which models are most feasible 
(i.e. caseload or team models)? Can a continuity model for group ANC be developed for settings where other 
MLCC models are not feasible?
 • Can a group ANC model be developed for LMICs, to provide guidance on the optimal group size, frequency and 
content of group ANC contacts?
 • Is group ANC acceptable (data should include the views of women who decline to participate), feasible and 
cost-effective in LMIC settings?
 • Are mixed models (group and individual ANC) feasible and acceptable, and are there benefits to mixed models?
 • What are the effects of group ANC on maternal and perinatal health outcomes, coverage outcomes (ANC 
contacts and facility-based births), and women’s and providers’ experiences?
 • Should women with complicated pregnancies also be offered group ANC, for the communication and social 
support aspects, in addition to receiving specialist care?
 • How acceptable and feasible are mixed-gender community mobilization groups? What are the optimal methods 
for community-based interventions to improve communication and support for pregnant women and adolescent 
girls; to improve integration of community-based mobilization efforts with health systems; and to ensure 
continuity of care with home visits? What are the mechanisms of effect of these interventions?
 • Can the 2016 WHO ANC model with a minimum of eight contacts impact the quality of ANC in LMICs, and 
what is the effect on health, values, acceptability, resources, feasibility and equity parameters?
 ANC: antenatal care; ASB: asymptomatic bacteriuria; GDM: gestational diabetes mellitus; IPV: intimate partner violence;  
LMICs: low- and middle-income countries; MLCC: midwife-led continuity of care; PROM: prelabour rupture of membranes;  
RUTI: recurrent urinary tract infections; SFH: symphysis-fundal height; SGA: small for gestational age
6. Dissemination, applicability 
and updating of the guideline and 
recommendations
 6.1 Dissemination 
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 120
 This guideline will be available online for download and 
also as a printed publication. Online versions will be 
available via the websites of the WHO Departments 
of Reproductive Health and Research (RHR), Nutrition 
for Health and Development (NHD) and Maternal, 
Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health (MCA), 
and through the WHO Reproductive Health Library 
(RHL).7 Print versions will be distributed to WHO 
regional and country offices, ministries of health, WHO 
collaborating centres, NGO partners and professional 
associations, using the same distribution list that was 
developed for the implementation of focused ANC 
(FANC). The guideline will be accompanied by an 
independent critical appraisal based on the AGREE 
instrument (Appraisal of Guidelines for Research & 
Evaluation) (213). Technical meetings will be held 
within the WHO Departments of RHR, NHD and 
MCA to share the recommendations and derivative 
products, which will include a practical manual for 
implementation of the new 2016 WHO ANC model, 
with the teams responsible for policy and programme 
implementation.
 Two sets of evidence briefs will be developed: one set 
for policy-makers and programme managers and the 
other set for health-care professionals. These evidence 
briefs, which will highlight the recommendations 
and implementation-related contextual issues, will 
be developed and disseminated in collaboration 
USAID, FIGO and ICM. The briefs will be organized in 
alignment with the different sections of the guideline, 
for example focusing on nutrition, maternal and fetal 
assessment or preventive measures to allow for 
derivative products to be tailored and disseminated 
accordingly to partners.
 The executive summary and recommendations 
from this publication will be translated into the six 
UN languages for dissemination through the WHO 
7 RHL is available at: http://apps.who.int/rhl/en/
 regional offices and during meetings organized by, or 
attended by, staff of the WHO Departments of RHR, 
MCA and NHD.
 In addition to online and print versions of this 
guideline, an interactive web-based version 
is planned, which will be developed by a 
professional infographics group. This will facilitate 
the dissemination and uptake of the guideline 
recommendations by making them available online 
in a user-friendly format, and will allow a platform 
for cross-referenced recommendations to be 
updated on an ongoing basis to ensure that the 
recommendations are up to date. Furthermore, this 
would allow for products to be organized by different 
topics (e.g. nutrition) and allow for focused activities 
and products to be developed. English, French, 
Portuguese and Spanish (the latter in collaboration 
with the WHO Regional Office for the Americas/Pan 
American Health Organization [PAHO]) web-based 
versions are planned and have been budgeted for.
 The guideline will also be launched on the WHO 
Department of RHR official website as part of the 
monthly "HRP News”. This site currently has over 
3000 subscribers including clinicians, programme 
managers, policy-makers and health service users 
from all around the world. In addition, a number of 
articles presenting the recommendations and key 
implementation considerations will be published, in 
compliance with WHO’s open access and copyright 
policies. Relevant WHO clusters, departments 
and partnerships, such as HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis 
and Malaria, the Initiative for Vaccine Research 
(IVR) and the Partnership for Maternal, Newborn 
& Child Health (PMNCH) will also be part of this 
dissemination process.
 In an effort to increase dissemination of WHO 
guidelines on sexual and reproductive health and 
rights, a search function with the ability to search the 
database of WHO guidelines and recommendations 
has been created and recently launched by 
the Department of RHR.8 The ANC guideline 
recommendations will be made available via this new 
search function.
 The Maternal and Perinatal Health and Preventing 
Unsafe Abortion team of the WHO Department 
of RHR, in collaboration with the Departments of 
NHD and MCA and other partners, will support 
national and subnational working groups to adapt 
and implement the guideline. This process will 
include the development or revision of existing 
national guidelines or protocols in line with the WHO 
guideline. The GREAT Network (Guideline-driven, 
Research priorities, Evidence synthesis, Application 
of evidence, and Transfer of knowledge) will be used 
to bring together relevant stakeholders to identify 
and assess the priorities, barriers and facilitators to 
guideline implementation, and to support the efforts 
of stakeholders to develop adaptations and guideline 
implementation strategies tailored to the local 
context (214). This includes technical support for 
local guideline implementers in the development of 
training manuals, flow charts and quality indicators, 
as well as participation in stakeholder meetings.
 6.2 Applicability issues
 Anticipated impact of the guideline on the 
organization of ANC
 Effective implementation of the recommendations 
in this guideline will likely require reorganization of 
care and redistribution of health-care resources, 
particularly in low- and middle-income countries 
(LMICs). The potential barriers to implementation 
include the following:
 n
 n lack of human resources with the necessary 
expertise and skills to implement, supervise and 
support recommended practices, including client 
counselling;
 n
 n lack of infrastructure to support interventions, e.g. 
lack of power to support ultrasound equipment;
 n
 n lack of physical space to conduct individual or 
group-based counselling;
 n
 n lack of community understanding of the new 
model of care, particularly around the contact 
schedule and potentially longer wait times;
 n
 n lack of physical resources, e.g. equipment, test kits, 
supplies, medicines and nutritional supplements; 
8 This can be accessed at: search.optimizemnh.org
 n
 n lack of effective referral mechanisms and care 
pathways for women identified as needing 
additional care;
 n
 n lack of understanding of the value of newly 
recommended interventions among health-care 
providers and system managers.
 n
 n lack of health information management systems 
(HMISs) designed to document and monitor 
recommended practices (e.g. client cards, 
registers, etc.).
 Given the potential barriers noted above, a 
phased approach to adoption, adaptation and 
implementation of the guideline recommendations 
may be prudent. Various strategies for addressing 
these barriers and facilitating implementation have 
been suggested in the list of considerations at the end 
of Chapter 4.
 Monitoring and evaluating the impact of 
the guideline
 The implementation and impact of these 
recommendations will be monitored at the health
service, regional and country levels, based on clearly 
defined criteria and indicators that are associated 
with locally agreed targets. In collaboration with 
the monitoring and evaluation teams of the 
WHO Departments of RHR and MCA, data on 
country- and regional-level implementation of the 
recommendations will be collected and evaluated in 
the short to medium term to evaluate their impact on 
national policies of individual WHO Member States. 
Interrupted time series, clinical audits or criterion
based audits could be used to obtain the relevant 
data on the interventions contained in this guideline.
 6.3 Updating the guideline
 In accordance with the concept of WHO’s GREAT 
Network, which employs a systematic and continuous 
process of identifying and bridging evidence gaps 
following guideline implementation (214), the 
proposed guideline will be updated five years 
after publication unless significant new evidence 
emerges that necessitates earlier revision. The WHO 
Steering Group will continue to follow the research 
developments in the area of ANC, particularly for 
those questions for which no evidence was found and 
those that are supported by low-quality evidence, 
where new recommendations or a change in the 
published recommendation may be warranted, 
121
 Chapter 6. Dissemination, applicability and updating
respectively. Any concern about the validity of any 
recommendation will be promptly communicated via 
the interactive website for the guideline,9 and plans 
will be made to update the recommendation, as 
needed.
 Two years after publication and dissemination of 
the guideline, an online survey will be conducted 
through WHO regional and country offices and 
through selected respondents of other user groups 
(e.g. professional societies, NGOs) to gauge the 
status and extent of in-country utilization and 
adaptation, and whether any recommendations in the 
guideline have been implemented or influenced policy 
decisions. This survey will also help in gathering 
feedback relevant to future modifications. Requests 
for additional guidance may also be received from 
WHO Member States. Stakeholders can address 
suggestions for additional questions for inclusion 
in the updated version of the guideline to the WHO 
Department of RHR by email (reproductivehealth@
 who.int).
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 122
 As the guideline nears the end of the proposed 
f
 ive-year validity period, the responsible technical 
officer (or another designated WHO staff person), 
in conjunction with the WHO Steering Group, will 
assess the currency of the recommendations and 
the need for new guidance on the topic. This will be 
achieved by performing a scoping exercise among 
technical experts, health professionals, researchers 
and service users to identify controversial or priority 
areas where further evidence-based guidance may be 
needed.
 9 Available at: www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/
 maternal_perinatal_health/anc-positive-pregnancy-experience/
 en/
 All technical products developed during the process 
of developing this guideline – including full reports of 
systematic reviews, corresponding search strategies 
and dates of searches, Cochrane Review Manager 
(RevMan)10 files customized for priority outcomes, 
and the basis for quality rating of outcomes within 
the GRADE process – will be archived in the 
departmental shared folder for future reference and 
use. Where there are concerns about the validity of a 
particular recommendation based on new evidence, 
the systematic review addressing the primary 
question will be updated. To update the review, the 
search strategy used for the initial review will be 
applied, possibly by the same systematic review team 
or another team if the initial review team is no longer 
available.
 Any new questions identified following the scoping 
exercise at the end of five years will undergo a similar 
process of evidence retrieval, synthesis and grading 
in accordance with the WHO standards for guideline 
development.
 The guideline development process exposed several 
knowledge gaps related to antenatal screening of 
GDM, syphilis and haemoglobinopathies. WHO aims 
to develop further guidance around these topics 
so that the appropriate recommendations can be 
included in updated ANC guidance. In addition, future 
updates will aim to include more recommendations 
on how to improve ANC utilization, quality and 
delivery, which will be informed by new WHO 
guidance on improving the quality of care throughout 
the antenatal, intrapartum and postnatal continuum.
 10 For further information, see: http://www.cochrane.org/revman
References
 1. 
2. 
3. 
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner 
for Human Rights (OHCHR). Technical guidance 
on the application of a human rights-based 
approach to the implementation of policies and 
programmes to reduce preventable maternal 
morbidity and mortality. Human Rights 
Council, twentieth session. New York (NY): 
United Nations General Assembly; 2012 (A/
 HRC/21/22; http://www2.ohchr.org/english/
 issues/women/docs/A.HRC.21.22_en.pdf, 
accessed 28 September 2016).
 Tunçalp Ö, Were WM, MacLennan C, Oladapo 
OT, Gülmezoglu AM, Bahl R et al. Quality of 
care for pregnant women and newborns-the 
WHO vision. BJOG. 2015;122(8):1045–9. 
doi:10.1111/1471-0528.13451.
 Alkema L, Chou D, Hogan D, Zhang S, Moller 
A-B, Gemmill A et al.; United Nations Maternal 
Mortality Estimation Inter-Agency Group 
collaborators and technical advisory group. 
Global, regional, and national levels and trends 
in maternal mortality between 1990 and 2015, 
with scenario-based projections to 2030: 
a systematic analysis by the UN Maternal 
Mortality Estimation Inter-Agency Group. 
Lancet. 2016;387(10017):462–74. doi:10.1016/
 S0140-6736(15)00838-7.
 4. Maternal mortality. Fact sheet No. 348; Geneva: 
World Health Organization; 2014 (http://www.
 who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs348/en/
 index.html, accessed 22 June 2014).
 5. 
6. 
Blencowe H, Cousens S, Bianchi Jassir F, Chou 
D, Mathers C et al. National, regional, and 
worldwide estimates of stillbirth rates in 2015, 
with trends from 2000: a systematic analysis. 
Lancet. 2016;4(2):e98–108. doi:10.1016/S2214
109X(15)00275-2.
 Campbell OMR, Graham WJ; The Lancet 
Maternal Survival Series Steering Group. 
Strategies for reducing maternal mortality: 
getting on with what works. Lancet. 
2006;368:1284–99.
 7. 
8. 
9. 
Fisk NM, McKee M, Atun, R. Relative and 
absolute addressability of global disease burden 
in maternal and perinatal health by investment in 
R&D. Trop Med Int Health. 2011;16(6):662-8.
 Carroli G, Rooney C, Villar J. How effective 
is antenatal care in preventing maternal 
mortality and serious morbidity? An overview 
of the evidence. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol. 
2001;15(Suppl 1):1–42.
 Souza JP, Gülmezoglu AM, Vogel J, Carroli G, 
Lumbiganon P, Qureshi Z et al. Moving beyond 
essential interventions for reduction of maternal 
mortality (the WHO Multi-country Survey 
on Maternal and Newborn Health): a cross
sectional study. Lancet. 2013;381(9879):1747
55. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60686-8.
 10. Integrated Management of Pregnancy and 
Childbirth (IMPAC). In: Maternal, newborn, 
child and adolescent health [WHO web page]. 
Geneva: World Health Organization  
(http://www.who.int/maternal_child_
 adolescent/topics/maternal/impac/en/, 
accessed 17 October 2016).
 11. 
Lincetto O, Mothebesoane-Anoh, Gomez P, 
Munjanja S. Chapter 2: Antenatal care. In: 
Lawn J, Kerber K, editors. Opportunities for 
Africa’s Newborns: practical data, policy and 
programmatic support for newborn care in 
Africa. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2006: 51–62 (http://www.who.int/pmnch/
 media/publications/aonsectionIII_2.pdf, 
accessed 6 October 2016).
 12. WHO antenatal care randomized trial: manual 
for the implementation of the new model. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2002 
(http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/
 publications/maternal_perinatal_health/
 RHR_01_30/en/, accessed 6 October 2016).
 13. Downe S, Finlayson K, Tunçalp Ö, Gülmezoglu 
AM. What matters to women: a scoping 
review to identify the processes and 
outcomes of antenatal care provision that 
123
 References
are important to healthy pregnant women. 
BJOG. 2016;123(4):529–39. doi:10.1111/1471
0528.13819.
 14. WHO handbook for guideline development, 2nd 
edition. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2014 (http://www.who.int/kms/handbook_2nd_
 ed.pdf, accessed 6 October 2016).
 15. GRADE [website]. The GRADE Working Group; 
2016 (http://gradeworkinggroup.org/, accessed 
27 October 2016).
 16. GRADE-CERQual [website]. The GRADE
CERQual Project Group; 2016 (https://cerqual.
 org/, accessed 27 October 2016).
 17. DECIDE [website]. The DECIDE Project; 2016 
(http://www.decide-collaboration.eu/, accessed 
27 October 2016).
 18. Abalos A, Chamillard M, Diaz V, Tunçalp Ö, 
Gülmezoglu AM. Antenatal care for healthy 
pregnant women: a mapping of interventions 
from existing guidelines to inform the 
development of new WHO guidance on 
antenatal care. BJOG. 2016;123(4):519–28. 
doi:10.1111/1471-0528.13820.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 124
 19. WHO, United Nations Population Fund, 
United Nations Children’s Fund. Integrated 
Management of Pregnancy and Childbirth. 
Pregnancy, childbirth, postpartum and newborn 
care: a guide for essential practice, 3rd edition. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (WHO); 
2015 (http://www.who.int/maternal_child_
 adolescent/documents/imca-essential-practice
guide/en/, accessed 26 September 2016).
 20. Di Mario S, Basevi V, Gori G, Spettoli D. 
What is the effectiveness of antenatal care? 
(supplement). Health Evidence Network report. 
Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 
2005 (http://www.euro.who.int/data/assets/
 pdf_file/0005/74660/E87997.pdf, accessed 
26 September 2016).
 21. Essential interventions, commodities and 
guidelines for reproductive, maternal, newborn 
and child health: a global review of the key 
interventions related to reproductive, maternal, 
newborn and child health (RMNCH). Geneva: 
The Partnership for Maternal, Newborn & Child 
Health (PMNCH); 2011 (http://www.who.int/
 pmnch/topics/part_publications/essential_
 interventions_18_01_2012.pdf, accessed 
29 September 2016).
 22. Downe S, Finlayson K, Tunçalp Ö, Gülmezoglu 
AM. Factors that influence the use of routine 
antenatal services by pregnant women: a 
qualitative evidence synthesis. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2016;(10):CD012392.
 23. Higgins JPT, Green S, editors. Cochrane 
handbook for systematic reviews of 
interventions, version 5.1.0 (updated March 
2011). The Cochrane Collaboration; 2011 
(http://handbook.cochrane.org/, accessed 
29 September 2016).
 24. Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Group. 
Pregnancy and Childbirth Group’s Trials Register 
[website]. The Cochrane Collaboration; 2016 
(http://pregnancy.cochrane.org/pregnancy
and-childbirth-groups-trials-register, accessed 
27 October 2016).
 25. Walsh D, Downe S. Appraising the quality of 
qualitative research. Midwifery. 2006;22(2):108
19. doi:10.1016/j.midw.2005.05.004.
 26. Lewin S, Glenton C, Munthe-Kaas H, Carlsen 
B, Colvin CJ, Gülmezoglu AM et al. Using 
qualitative evidence in decision making for 
health and social interventions: an approach to 
assess confidence in findings from qualitative 
evidence syntheses (GRADE-CERQual). PLoS 
Med. 2015;12(10):e1001895. doi:10.1371/journal.
 pmed.1001895.
 27. OneHealth Model: intervention treatment 
assumptions (draft 28 September). Geneva 
and Glastonbury (CT): United Nations 
InterAgency Working Group on Costing and 
the Futures Institute; 2013 (http://avenirhealth.
 org/Download/Spectrum/Manuals/
 Intervention%20Assumptions%202013%20
 9%2028.pdf, accessed 4 October 2016).
 28. WHO compendium of innovative health 
technologies for low-resource settings, 
2011–2014: assistive devices, eHealth 
solutions, medical devices, other technologies, 
technologies for outbreaks. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2015 (http://www.who.int/
 medical_devices/innovation/compendium/en/, 
accessed 26 September 2016).
 29. State of inequality: reproductive, maternal, 
newborn and child health. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2015 (http://www.who.int/gho/
 health_equity/report_2015/en/, accessed 
29 September 2016).
 30. Effective Practice and Organisation of Care 
(EPOC). EPOC Resources for review authors. 
Oslo: Norwegian Knowledge Centre for the 
Health Services; 2015 (http://epoc.cochrane.
 org/epoc-specific-resources-review-authors, 
accessed 28 September 2016).
 31. Tang AM, Chung M, Dong K, Terrin N, Edmonds 
A, Assefa N et al. Determining a global mid
upper arm circumference cutoff to assess 
malnutrition in pregnant women. Washington 
(DC): FHI 360/Food and Nutrition Technical 
Assistance III Project (FANTA); 2016 (http://
 www.fantaproject.org/sites/default/files/
 resources/FANTA-MUAC-cutoffs-pregnant
women-June2016.pdf, accessed 26 September 
2016).
 32. Popkin S, Slining MM. New dynamics in 
global obesity facing low- and middle-income 
countries. Obes Rev. 2013;14(2):11–20. 
doi:10.1111/obr.12102.
 33. The global prevalence of anaemia in 2011. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015 
(http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/ 
10665/177094/1/9789241564960_eng.pdf,  
accessed 29 September 2016).
 34. WHO; de Benoist B, McLean E, Egli I, Cogswell 
M, editors. Worldwide prevalence of anaemia 
1993–2005. WHO global database on 
anaemia. Geneva: World Health Organization 
(WHO); 2008 (http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/43894/1/9789241596657_
 eng.pdf, accessed 26 September 2016).
 35. United Nations Children’s Fund, United Nations 
University, WHO. Iron deficiency anaemia: 
assessment, prevention, and control: a guide for 
programme managers. Geneva: World Health 
Organization (WHO); 2001 (WHO/NHD/01.3; 
http://www.who.int/nutrition/publications/
 en/ida_assessment_prevention_control.pdf, 
accessed 29 September 2016).
 36. Guideline: daily iron and folic acid 
supplementation in pregnant women. Geneva: 
World Health Organization; 2012 (http://www.
 who.int/nutrition/publications/micronutrients/
 guidelines/daily_ifa_supp_pregnant_women/
 en/, accessed 28 September 2016).
 37. Global prevalence of vitamin A deficiency in 
populations at risk 1995–2005. WHO Global 
Database on vitamin A deficiency. Geneva: 
World Health Organization; 2009 (http://www.
 who.int/nutrition/publications/micronutrients/
 vitamin_a_deficiency/9789241598019/en/, 
accessed 29 September 2016).
 38. Guideline: calcium supplementation in 
pregnant women. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2013 (http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/85120/1/9789241505376_
 eng.pdf, accessed 28 September 2016).
 39. Roohani N, Hurrell R, Kelishadi R, Schulin 
R. Zinc and its importance for human 
health: an integrative review. J Res Med Sci. 
2013;18(2):144–57.
 40. Jahanfar S, Jaafar SH. Effects of restricted 
caffeine intake by mother on fetal, neonatal and 
pregnancy outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2015;(6):CD006965.
 41. Healthy diet. Fact sheet No. 394. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2015 (http://www.who.int/
 mediacentre/factsheets/fs394/en/, accessed 
1 November 2016).
 42. Exercise in pregnancy. RCOG Statement 
No. 4. Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists. 2006:1–7 (https://www.
 rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-research-services/
 guidelines/exercise-in-pregnancy-statement
no.4/, accessed 24 October 2016).
 43. Rasmussen KM, Yaktine AL, editors; 
Institute of Medicine and National Research 
Council. Weight gain during pregnancy: 
re-examining the guidelines. Washington 
(DC): The National Academies Press; 2009 
(http://www.nationalacademies.org/hmd/
 125
 References
Reports/2009/Weight-Gain-During-Pregnancy
Reexaminingthe-Guidelines.aspx, accessed 
29 September 2016).
 44. Muktabhant B, Lawrie TA, Lumbiganon P, 
Laopaiboon M. Diet or exercise, or both, for 
preventing excessive gestational weight gain 
in pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(6):CD007145.
 45. Downe S, Finlayson K, Tunçalp Ö, Gülmezoglu 
AM. Factors that influence the provision of good 
quality routine antenatal care services by health 
staff: a qualitative evidence synthesis. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2016 (in press).
 46. Physical status: the use and interpretation 
of anthropometry: report of a WHO Expert 
Committee. Technical Report Series No. 854. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 1995 
(http://whqlibdoc.who.int/trs/WHO_TRS_854.
 pdf, accessed 28 September 2016).
 47. Ota E, Hori H, Mori R, Tobe-Gai R, Farrar 
D. Antenatal dietary education and 
supplementation to increase energy and 
protein intake. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(6):CD000032.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 126
 48. Food Security Portal [website]. Washington 
(DC): International Food Policy Research Institute 
(IFPRI); 2012 (http://www.foodsecurityportal.
 org/, accessed 28 September 2016).
 49. Shaheen R, Streatfield PK, Naved RT, Lindholm 
L, Persson LÅ. Equity in adherence to and 
effect of prenatal food and micronutrient 
supplementation on child mortality: results from 
the MINIMat randomized trial, Bangladesh. BMC 
Public Health. 2014;14:5. doi:10.1186/1471-2458
14-5.
 50. The clinical use of blood in general medicine, 
obstetrics, paediatrics, surgery & anaesthesia, 
trauma & burns. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 1998 (http://www.who.int/
 bloodsafety/clinical_use/en/Manual_EN.pdf, 
accessed 29 September 2016).
 51. Iron and folate supplementation: integrated 
management of pregnancy and childbirth 
(IMPAC). Standards for maternal and neonatal 
care 1.8. Geneva: Department of Making 
Pregnancy Safer, World Health Organization; 
2006 (http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/
 publications/maternal_perinatal_health/
 iron_folate_supplementation.pdf, accessed 
29 September 2016).
 52. The international pharmacopoeia, 5th edition, 
volumes 1 and 2. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2015 (http://apps.who.int/phint/
 en/p/about, accessed 4 October 2016).
 53. The WHO Expert Committee on Specifications 
for Pharmaceutical Preparations. Quality 
assurance of pharmaceuticals: meeting a major 
public health challenge. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2007 (WHO/PSM/QSM/2007.5; 
http://www.who.int/medicines/publications/
 brochure_pharma.pdf, accessed 4 October 2016).
 54. Peña-Rosas JP, De-Regil LM, Garcia-Casal MN, 
Dowswell T. Daily oral iron supplementation 
during pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(7):CD004736.
 55. Guideline: intermittent iron and folic 
acid supplementation in non-anaemic 
pregnant women. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2012 (http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/75335/1/9789241502016_
 eng.pdf, accessed 28 September 2016).
 56. Peña-Rosas JP, De-Regil LM, Gomez 
Malave H, Flores-Urrutia MC, Dowswell T. 
Intermittent oral iron supplementation during 
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(19):CD009997.
 57. WHO recommendations for prevention 
and treatment of pre-eclampsia and 
eclampsia. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2011 (http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/44703/1/9789241548335_
 eng.pdf, accessed 29 September 2016).
 58. Buppasiri P, Lumbiganon P, Thinkhamrop J, 
Ngamjarus C, Laopaiboon M, Medley N. Calcium 
supplementation (other than for preventing 
or treating hypertension) for improving 
pregnancy and infant outcomes. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2015;(2):CD007079. 
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD007079.pub3.
59. Hofmeyr GJ, Lawrie TA, Atallah ÁN, Duley L, 
Torloni MR. Calcium supplementation during 
pregnancy for preventing hypertensive disorders 
and related problems. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2014;(6):CD001059.
 60. Guideline: vitamin A supplementation in 
pregnant women. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2011 (http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/44625/1/9789241501781_
 eng.pdf, accessed 29 September 2016).
 61. Sommer A, Davidson FR. Assessment and 
control of vitamin A deficiency: the Annecy 
Accords. J Nutr. 2002;132:2845S-50S.
 62. Safe vitamin A dosage during pregnancy 
and lactation. Recommendations and report 
of a consultation. Micronutrient series. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 1998 
(WHO/NUT/98.4; http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/63838/1/WHO_NUT_98.4_
 eng.pdf, accessed 29 September 2016).
 63. McCauley ME, van den Broek N, Dou L, Othman 
M. Vitamin A supplementation during pregnancy 
for maternal and newborn outcomes. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2015;(10):CD008666.
 64. Ota E, Mori R, Middleton P, Tobe-Gai 
R, Mahomed K, Miyazaki C et al. Zinc 
supplementation for improving pregnancy and 
infant outcome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(2):CD000230.
 65. Haider BA, Bhutta ZA. Multiple-micronutrient 
supplementation for women during 
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(11):CD004905.
 66. UNICEF, WHO, United Nations University. 
Composition of a multi-micronutrient 
supplement to be used in pilot programmes 
among pregnancy women in developing 
countries: report of a United Nations Children’s 
Fund (UNICEF), World Health Organization 
(WHO) and United Nations University 
workshop. New York (NY): UNICEF; 1999 
(http://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/75358, 
accessed 18 December 2015).
 67. Devakumar D, Fall CHD, Sachdev HS, 
Margetts BM, Osmond C, Wells JCK et al. 
Maternal antenatal multiple micronutrient 
supplementation for long-term health benefits in 
children: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
BMC Med. 2016;14(1):90. doi:10.1186/s12916
016-0633-3.
 68. Technical consultation: multiple micronutrient 
supplements in pregnancy: implementation 
considerations for successful integration 
into existing programmes. Meeting held in 
collaboration with United Nations Children’s 
Fund (UNICEF) and the Micronutrient Initiative 
(MI). Geneva: World Health Organization; 
18–20 August 2015 (http://www.who.int/
 nutrition/events/2015_meeting_microsupp_
 pregnancy_18to20aug/en/, accessed 27 October 
2016).
 69. Salam RA, Zuberi NF, Bhutta ZA. Pyridoxine 
(vitamin B6) supplementation during 
pregnancy or labour for maternal and neonatal 
outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(6):CD000179.
 70. Allen L, de Benoist B, Dary O, Hurrell R, 
editors. Guidelines on food fortification 
with micronutrients. Geneva: World Health 
Organization and Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations; 2006 
(http://www.who.int/nutrition/publications/
 guide_food_fortification_micronutrients.pdf, 
accessed 29 September 2016).
 71. Joint Formulary Committee. Vitamin deficiency. 
Chapter 9: Blood and Nutrition. In: British 
National Formulary (BNF) 72. London: BMJ 
Publishing Group Ltd and Royal Pharmaceutical 
Society; 2016.
 72. Rumbold A, Ota E, Hori H, Miyazaki C, 
Crowther CA. Vitamin E supplementation 
in pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(9):CD004069.
 73. Rumbold A, Ota E, Nagata C, Shahrook S, 
Crowther CA. Vitamin C supplementation 
in pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(9):CD004072.
 127
 References
74. Joint Formulary Committee. Vitamin deficiency. 
Chapter 9: Blood and Nutrition. In: British 
National Formulary (BNF) 72. London: BMJ 
Publishing Group Ltd and Royal Pharmaceutical 
Society; 2016.
 75. Guideline: Vitamin D supplementation in 
pregnant women. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2012 (http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/85313/1/9789241504935_
 eng.pdf, accessed 4 October 2016).
 76. De-Regil LM, Palacios C, Lombardo LK, Peña
Rosas JP. Vitamin D supplementation for women 
during pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2016;(1):CD008873.
 77. Chen LW, Wu Y, Neelakantan N, Chong MF, 
Pan A, van Dam RM. Maternal caffeine intake 
during pregnancy is associated with risk of low 
birth weight: a systematic review and dose
response meta-analysis. BMC Med. 2014;12:174. 
doi:10.1186/s12916-014-0174-6.
 78. Rhee J, Kim R, Kim Y, Tam M, Lai Y, Keum N, 
Oldenburg CE. Maternal caffeine consumption 
during pregnancy and risk of low birth weight: a 
dose-response meta-analysis of observational 
studies. PLoS One. 2015;10(7):e0132334. 
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 128
 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0132334.
 79. Chen LW, Wu Y, Neelakantan N, Chong MF, 
Pan A, van Dam RM. Maternal caffeine intake 
during pregnancy and risk of pregnancy 
loss: a categorical and dose-response meta
analysis of prospective studies. Public Health 
Nutr. 2016:19(7):1233–44. doi:10.1017/
 S1368980015002463.
 80. Li J, Zhao H, Song JM, Zhang J, Tang YL, Xin 
CM. A meta-analysis of risk of pregnancy 
loss and caffeine and coffee consumption 
during pregnancy. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 
2015;130(2):116-22. doi:10.1016/j.
 ijgo.2015.03.033.
 81. Sobhy S, Rogozinska E, Khan KS. Accuracy of on
site tests to detect anaemia in antenatal care: a 
systematic review. BJOG. 2016 (in press).
 82. Medina Lara A, Mundy C, Kandulu J, 
Chisuwo L, Bates I. Evaluation and costs of 
different haemoglobin methods for use in 
district hospitals in Malawi. J Clin Pathol. 
2005;58(1):56–60.
 83. Smaill FM, Vazquez JC. Antibiotics 
for asymptomatic bacteriuria in 
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(8):CD000490.
 84. Schmiemann G, Kniehl E, Gebhardt K, 
Matejczyk MM, Hummers-Pradier E. 
The diagnosis of urinary tract infection: a 
systematic review. Deutsches Ärzteblatt 
International. 2010;107(21):361–7. doi:10.3238/
 arztebl.2010.0361.
 85. Global and regional estimates of violence 
against women: prevalence and health effects of 
intimate partner violence and non-partner sexual 
violence. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2013 (http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/
 publications/violence/9789241564625/en/, 
accessed 29 September 2016).
 86. Responding to intimate partner violence and 
sexual violence against women: WHO clinical 
and policy guidelines. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2013 (http://apps.who.int/rhl/
 guidelines/9789241548595/en/, accessed 
29 September 2016).
 87. van den Broek NR, Ntonya C, Mhango E, 
White SA. Diagnosing anaemia in pregnancy 
in rural clinics: assessing the potential of the 
Haemoglobin Colour Scale. Bull World Health 
Organ. 1999;77(1):15–21.
 88. Rogozinska E, Formina S, Zamora J, Mignini L, 
Khan KS. Accuracy of on-site tests to detect 
asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregnancy: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet 
Gynecol. 2016;128(3):495–503. doi:10.1097/
 AOG.0000000000001597.
 89. O’Doherty L, Hegarty K, Ramsay J, Davidson LL, 
Feder G, Taft A. Screening women for intimate 
partner violence in healthcare settings. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2015;(7):CD007007.
 90. Jahanfar S, Howard LM, Medley N. Interventions 
for preventing or reducing domestic violence 
against pregnant women. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2014;(11):CD009414.
91. Health care for women subjected to intimate 
partner violence or sexual violence: a clinical 
handbook. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2014 (WHO/RHR/14.26; http://www.who.int/
 reproductivehealth/publications/violence/vaw
clinical-handbook/en/, accessed 26 October 
2016).
 92. Abramsky T, Devries K, Kiss L, Francisco 
L, Nakuti J, Musuya T et al. A community 
mobilization intervention to prevent violence 
against women and reduce HIV/AIDS risk in 
Kampala, Uganda (the SASA! Study): study 
protocol for a cluster randomised controlled trial. 
Trials. 2012;13:96. doi:10.1186/1745-6215-13-96.
 93. Krishnan S, Subbiah K, Chandra P, Srinivasan 
K. Minimizing risks and monitoring safety of an 
antenatal care intervention to mitigate domestic 
violence among young Indian women: The 
Dil Mil trial. BMC Public Health. 2012;12:943. 
doi:10.1186/1471-2458-12-943.
 94. Diagnostic criteria and classification of 
hyperglycaemia first detected in pregnancy. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013 
(WHO/NMH/MND/13.2; http://www.who.
 int/diabetes/publications/Hyperglycaemia_In_
 Pregnancy/en/, accessed 29 September 2016).
 95. Antenatal care for uncomplicated pregnancies: 
clinical guideline [CG62]. United Kingdom: 
National Institute for Health and Clinical 
Excellence; 2008 (updated 2016) (https://
 www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg62, accessed 
30 September 2016).
 96. WHO recommendations for the prevention and 
management of tobacco use and second-hand 
smoke exposure in pregnancy. Geneva:  
World Health Organization; 2013 (http:// 
www.who.int/tobacco/publications/pregnancy/
 guidelinestobaccosmokeexposure/en/, accessed 
29 September 2016).
 97. Guidelines for the identification and 
management of substance use and substance 
use disorders in pregnancy. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2014 (http://www.who.
 int/substance_abuse/publications/pregnancy_
 guidelines/en/, accessed 29 September 2016).
 98. Consolidated guidelines on HIV testing 
services 2015. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2015 (http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/179870/1/9789241508926_
 eng.pdf, accessed 29 September 2016).
 99. Guideline on when to start antiretroviral 
therapy and on pre-exposure prophylaxis for 
HIV. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2015 (http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/186275/1/9789241509565_
 eng.pdf, accessed 4 October 2016).
 100. Prevention of mother-to-child transmission of 
syphilis: integrated management of pregnancy 
and childbirth (IMPAC). Standards for maternal 
and neonatal care 1.3. Geneva: Department 
of Making Pregnancy Safer, World Health 
Organization; 2006 (http://www.who.int/
 reproductivehealth/publications/maternal_
 perinatal_health/prevention_mtct_syphilis.pdf, 
accessed 14 September 2016)
 101. WHO guidelines for the treatment of Chlamydia 
trachomatis. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2016 (http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/
 publications/rtis/chlamydia-treatment
guidelines/en/, accessed 27 October 2016)
 102. WHO guidelines for the treatment of 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2016 (http://www.who.
 int/reproductivehealth/publications/rtis/
 gonorrhoea-treatment-guidelines/en/, accessed 
27 October 2016)
 103. WHO guidelines for the treatment of Treponema 
pallidum (syphilis). Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2016 (http://www.who.int/
 reproductivehealth/publications/rtis/syphilis
treatment-guidelines/en/, accessed 27 October 
2016).
 104. Prevention of sexual transmission of Zika 
virus: interim guidance. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2016 (http://www.
 who.int/csr/resources/publications/zika/
 sexual-transmission-prevention/en/, accessed 
27 October 2016). 
129
 References
105. Systematic screening for active tuberculosis: 
principles and recommendations. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2013 (http://www.who.int/
 tb/publications/Final_TB_Screening_guidelines.
 pdf, accessed 29 September 2016).
 106. Pearson JF, Weaver JB. Fetal activity and 
fetal wellbeing: an evaluation. Br Med J. 
1976;1(6021):1305-7.
 107. Mangesi L, Hofmeyr GJ, Smith V, Smyth RMD. 
Fetal movement counting for assessment of 
fetal wellbeing. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(10):CD004909.
 108. Enkin M, Keirse MJNC, Neilson JP, Crowther 
C, Duley L, Hodnett E et al. A guide to effective 
care in pregnancy and childbirth, third edition. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2000.
 109. Robert Peter J, Ho JJ, Valliapan J, Sivasangari S. 
Symphysial fundal height (SFH) measurement 
in pregnancy for detecting abnormal fetal 
growth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(9):CD008136.
 110. Whitworth M, Bricker L, Mullan C. Ultrasound for 
fetal assessment in early pregnancy. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2015;(7):CD007058.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 130
 111. Maulik D, Mundy D, Heitmann E, Maulik 
D. Evidence-based approach to umbilical 
artery Doppler fetal surveillance in high
risk pregnancies: an update. Clin Obstet 
Gynecol. 2010;53(4):869–78. doi:10.1097/
 GRF.0b013e3181fbb5f5.
 112. Alfirevic Z, Stampalija T, Gyte GML. Fetal 
and umbilical Doppler ultrasound in high-risk 
pregnancies. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2013;(11):CD007529.
 113. Soothill PW, Ajayi RA, Campbell S, Nicolaides 
KH. Prediction of morbidity in small and 
normally grown fetuses by fetal heart rate 
variability, biophysical profile score and umbilical 
artery Doppler studies. Brit J Obstet Gynaecol. 
1993;100:742–5.
 114. Alfirevic Z, Stampalija T, Medley N. Fetal 
and umbilical Doppler ultrasound in normal 
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(4):CD001450.
 115. Delaram M, Shams S. The effect of foetal 
movement counting on maternal anxiety: a 
randomised, controlled trial. J Obstet Gynaecol. 
2015:39–43. doi:10.3109/01443615.2015.10257
 26.
 116. Pay ASD, Wiik J, Backe B, Jacobsson B, Strandell 
A, Klovning A. Symphysis-fundus height 
measurement to predict small-for-gestational
age status at birth: a systematic review. BMC 
Pregnancy Childbirth. 2015;15:22. doi:10.1186/
 s12884-015-0461-z.
 117. Grivell RM, Alfirevic Z, Gyte GML, Devane 
D. Antenatal cardiotocography for fetal 
assessment. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(9):CD007863.
 118. McClure EM, Nathan RO, Saleem S, Esamai F, 
Garces A, Chomba E et al. First look: a cluster
randomized trial of ultrasound to improve 
pregnancy outcomes in low income country 
settings. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2014;14:73. 
doi:10.1186/1471-2393-14-73.
 119. Manual of diagnostic ultrasound, second 
edition. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2013 (http://www.who.int/medical_devices/
 publications/manual_ultrasound_pack1-2/en/, 
accessed 26 October 2016).
 120. Whitworth M, Bricker L, Mullan C. Ultrasound for 
fetal assessment in early pregnancy. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2015;(7):CD007058.
 121. Bricker L, Medley N, Pratt JJ. Routine 
ultrasound in late pregnancy (after 24 weeks’ 
gestation). Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(6):CD001451.
 122. Harris RD, Marks WM. Compact ultrasound 
for improving maternal and perinatal care in 
low-resource settings. J Ultrasound Med. 2009. 
28(8):1067–76.
 123. Oluoch DA, Mwangome N, Kemp B, Seale AC, 
Koech AC, Papagrotghiou AT et al. “You cannot 
know if it’s a baby or not a baby”: uptake, 
provision and perceptions of antenatal care and 
routine ultrasound scanning in rural Kenya. BMC 
Pregnancy Childbirth. 2015;15:127. doi:10.1186/
 s12884-015-0565-5. 
124. Heyman B, Hundt G, Sandall J, Spencer K, 
Williams C, Grellier R, Pitson L. On being at 
higher risk: a qualitative study of prenatal 
screening for chromosomal anomalies. Soc 
Sci Med. 2006(62);2360–72. doi:10.1016/j.
 socscimed.2005.10.018.
 125. Rizvi M, Khan F, Shukla I, Malik A, Shaheen. 
Rising prevalence of antimicrobial resistance 
in urinary tract infections during pregnancy: 
necessity for exploring newer treatment 
options. J Lab Physicians. 2011;3(2):98–103. 
doi:10.4103/0974-2727.86842.
 126. Wang E, Smaill F. Infection in pregnancy. In: 
Chalmers I, Enkin MW, Keirse MJNC, editors. 
Effective care in pregnancy and childbirth. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1989:534–7.
 127. Schneeberger C, Geerlings SE, Middleton P, 
Crowther CA. Interventions for preventing 
recurrent urinary tract infection during 
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2012;(11):CD009279.
 128. Gilstrap LC 3rd, Cunningham FG, Whalley 
PJ. Acute pyelonephritis in pregnancy: an 
anterospective study. Obstet Gynecol. 
1981;57(4):409–13.
 129. Crowther C, Middleton P. Anti-D adminstration 
after childbirth for preventing rhesus 
alloimmunization. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
1997;(2):CD000021.
 130. Salam RA, Haider BA, Humayun Q, Bhutta 
ZA. Effect of administration of antihelminthics 
for soil-transmitted helminths during 
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(6):CD005547.
 131. Controlling disease due to helminth 
infections. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2003 (http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/42707/1/9241562390.pdf, 
accessed 29 September 2016).
 132. Blencowe H, Lawn J, Vandelaer J, Roper M, 
Cousens S. Tetanus toxoid immunization to 
reduce mortality from neonatal tetanus. Int J 
Epidemiol. 2010;39(Suppl 1):i102–i109.
 133. Lui L, Johnson HL, Cousens S, Perin J, Scott S, 
Lawn JE et al. Global, regional, and national 
causes of child mortality: an updated systematic 
analysis for 2010 with time trends since 2000. 
Lancet. 2012;379:2151–61.
 134. Maternal immunization against tetanus: 
integrated management of pregnancy and 
childbirth (IMPAC). Standards for maternal and 
neonatal care 1.1. Geneva: Department of Making 
Pregnancy Safer, World Health Organization; 
2006 (http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/
 publications/maternal_perinatal_health/
 immunization_tetanus.pdf, accessed 28 
September 2016).
 135. WHO recommendations for prevention 
and treatment of maternal peripartum 
infections. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2015 (http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/186171/1/9789241549363_
 eng.pdf, accessed 28 September 2016).
 136. Widmer M, Lopez I, Gülmezoglu AM, 
Mignini L, Roganti A. Duration of treatment 
for asymptomatic bacteriuria during 
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(11):CD000491.
 137. Joint Formulary Committee. Urinary tract 
infections. Chapter 5: Infection. In: British 
National Formulary (BNF) 72. London: BMJ 
Publishing Group Ltd and Royal Pharmaceutical 
Society; 2016.
 138. McBain RD, Crowther CA, Middleton P. Anti-D 
administration in pregnancy for preventing 
Rhesus alloimmunization. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2015;(9):CD000020.
 139. Joint Formulary Committee. Immunoglobulin 
therapy. Chapter 14: Vaccines. In: British 
National Formulary (BNF) 72. London: BMJ 
Publishing Group Ltd and Royal Pharmaceutical 
Society; 2016.
 140. Guideline: preventive chemotherapy to control 
soil-transmitted helminth infections in high-risk 
groups. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2016 (in press).
 131
 References
141. Preventive chemotherapy in human 
helminthiasis: coordinated use of 
antihelminthic drugs in control interventions: 
a manual for health professionals and 
programme managers. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2006 (http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/43545/1/9241547103_eng.
 pdf, accessed 26 September 2016).
 142. Salam RA, Haider BA, Humayun Q, Bhutta 
ZA. Effect of administration of antihelminthics 
for soil-transmitted helminths during 
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(6):CD005547.
 143. Christian P, Khatry SK, West KP, Jr. Antenatal 
anthelmintic treatment, birth weight, 
and infant survival in rural Nepal. Lancet. 
2004;364(9438):981–3.
 144. Passerini L, Casey GJ, Biggs BA, Cong DT, Phu LB, 
Phuc TQ et al. Increased birth weight associated 
with regular pre-pregnancy deworming 
and weekly iron-folic acid supplementation 
for Vietnamese women. PLoS Negl Trop 
Dis. 2012;6(4):e1608. doi:10.1371/journal.
 pntd.0001608.
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 132
 145. de Silva N R, Sirisena JL, Gunasekera DP, Ismail 
MM, de Silva HJ. Effect of mebendazole therapy 
during pregnancy on birth outcome. Lancet. 
1999;353(9159):1145–9.
 146. Mondadori E, Ehrhardt A, Le Anh T, Tran Cong 
D, Sepe G, Van Huyen N et al. Appreciation of 
school deworming program by parents in Ha 
Giang Province (Vietnam). Southeast Asian J 
Trop Med Public Health. 2006;37:1095–8.
 147. Thwaites CL, Loan HT. Eradication of tetanus. Br 
Med Bull. 2015;116(1):69–77. doi:10.1093/bmb/
 ldv044.
 148. Demicheli V, Barale A, Rivetti A. Vaccines 
for women for preventing neonatal 
tetanus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(7):CD002959.
 149. Blencowe H, Lawn J, Vandelaer J, Roper M, 
Cousens S. Tetanus toxoid immunization to 
reduce mortality from neonatal tetanus. Int J 
Epidemiol. 2010;39(Suppl 1):i102-i109.
 150. Statement on tetanus toxoid vaccine. Geneva: 
World Health Organization; 2014 (http://www.
 who.int/immunization/statement_on_tetanus_
 toxoid_vaccine.pdf, accessed 25 June 2016).
 151. Wolfson LJ, Gasse F, Lee-Martin S-P, Lydon 
P, Magan A, Tibouti A et al. Estimating the 
costs of achieving the WHO–UNICEF Global 
Immunization Vision and Strategy, 2006–2015. 
Bull World Health Organ. 2008;86(1):27–39.
 152. Mvundura M, Kien VD, Nga NT, Robertson J, 
Cuong NV, Tung HT et al. How much does it cost 
to get a dose of vaccine to the service delivery 
location? Empirical evidence from Vietnam’s 
Expanded Program on Immunization. Vaccine. 
2014;32:834–8.
 153. Guidelines for the treatment of malaria, 
third edition. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2015 (http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/162441/1/9789241549127_
 eng.pdf, accessed 28 September 2016).
 154. Kayentao K, Garner P, van Eijk AM, Naidoo 
I, Roper C, Mulokozi A et al. Intermittent 
preventive therapy for malaria during pregnancy 
using 2 vs 3 or more doses of sulfadoxine
pyrimethamine and risk of low birth weight in 
Africa: systematic review and meta-analysis. 
JAMA. 2013;309:594–604.
 155. Roll Back Malaria Partnership Malaria in 
Pregnancy Working Group. Consensus 
statement on folic acid supplementation during 
pregnancy. Geneva; 2015 (https://www.pmi.gov/
 docs/default-source/default-document-library/
 tools-curricula/consensus-statement-folic
acid-supplementation-during-pregnancy.pdf, 
accessed 26 September 2016).
 156. Einarson TR, Piwko C, Koren G. Quantifying 
the global rates of nausea and vomiting of 
pregnancy: a meta analysis. J Popul Ther Clin 
Pharmacol. 2013;20(2):e171–83.
 157. Matthews A, Haas DM, O’Mathúna DP, 
Dowswell T. Interventions for nausea and 
vomiting in early pregnancy. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2015;(9):CD007575. 
158. Albert H, Godskesen M, Westergaard J. 
Prognosis in four syndromes of pregnancy
related pelvic pain. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 
2001;80:505–10.
 159. Phupong V, Hanprasertpong T. Interventions for 
heartburn in pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2015;(9):CD011379.
 160. Smyth RMD, Aflaifel N, Bamigboye AA. 
Interventions for varicose veins and leg oedema 
in pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(10):CD001066.
 161. Rungsiprakarn P, Laopaiboon M, 
Sangkomkamhang US, Lumbiganon P, Pratt 
JJ. Interventions for treating constipation 
in pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(9):CD011448.
 162. Zhou K, West HM, Zhang J, Xu L, Li 
W. Interventions for leg cramps in 
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(8):CD010655.
 163. Matok I, Gorodischer R, Koren G, Sheiner 
E, Wiznitzer A, Levy A. The safety of 
metoclopramide use in first trimester of 
pregnancy. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:2528–35.
 164. Joint Formulary Committee. Disorders of gastric 
acid and ulceration. Chapter 1: Gastro-intestinal 
system. In: British National Formulary (BNF) 72. 
London: BMJ Publishing Group Ltd and Royal 
Pharmaceutical Society; 2016.
 165. Liddle SD, Pennick V. Interventions for preventing 
and treating low-back and pelvic pain during 
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(9):CD001139.
 166. Joint Formulary Committee. Constipation and 
bowel cleansing. Chapter 1: Gastro-intestinal 
system. In: British National Formulary (BNF) 72. 
London: BMJ Publishing Group Ltd and Royal 
Pharmaceutical Society; 2016.
 167. Shingler S, Robertson L, Boghossian S, Stewart 
M. Compression stockings for the initial 
treatment of varicose veins in patients without 
venous ulceration. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2013;(12):CD00881.
 168. Brown HC, Smith HJ, Mori R, Noma H. Giving 
women their own case notes to carry during 
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(10):CD002856.
 169. Mori R, Yonemoto N, Noma H, Ochirbat T, 
Barber E, Soyolgerel G et al. The maternal and 
child health (MCH) handbook in Mongolia: a 
cluster-randomized, controlled trial. PLoS One 
2015;10(4):e0119772.
 170. Hofmeyr GJ, Pattinson RC, Nikodem VC, 
Gülmezoglu AM. Charting fetal growth. J 
Comprehensive Health. 1994;5:62–7.
 171. ten Hoope-Bender P, de Bernis L, Campbell 
J, Downe S, Fauveau V, Fogstad H et al. 
Improvement of maternal and newborn health 
through midwifery. Lancet Special Issue. 
2014;384(9949):1226–35. doi:10.1016/S0140
6736(14)60930-2.
 172. Sandall J, Soltani H, Gates S, Shennan A, 
Devane D. Midwife-led continuity models 
versus other models of care for childbearing 
women. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(9):CD004667.
 173. Sandall J. The contribution of continuity of 
midwifery care to high quality maternity care. 
London: The Royal College of Midwives; 2014 
(https://www.rcm.org.uk/sites/default/files/
 Continuity%20of%20Care%20A5%20Web.pdf, 
accessed 26 September 2016).
 174. Catling CJ, Medley N, Foureur M, Ryan C, Leap N, 
Teate A, Homer CSE. Group versus conventional 
antenatal care for women. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2015;(2):CD007622.
 175. Mbuagbaw L, Medley N, Darzi AJ, Richardson 
M, Habiba Garga K, Ongolo-Zogo P. Health 
system and community level interventions 
for improving antenatal care coverage and 
health outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;(12):CD010994.
 176. Shah PM, Selwyn BJ, Shah K, Kumar V and 
collaborators. Evaluation of the home-based 
maternal record: a WHO collaborative study. Bull 
World Health Organ. 1993;71(5):535–48.
 133
 References
177. Hawley G, Janamian T, Jackson C, Wilkinson SA. 
In a maternity shared-care environment, what 
do we know about the paper hand-held and 
electronic health record: a systematic literature 
review. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2014;14:52. 
doi:10.1186/1471-2393-14-52.
 178. Tracy SK, Hartz DL, Tracy MB, Allen J, Forti A, 
Hall B et al. Caseload midwifery care versus 
standard maternity care for women of any risk: 
M@NGO, a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 
2013;382(9906):1723–32. doi:10.1016/S0140
6736(13)61406-3.
 179. Lori JR, Munro ML, Chuey MR. Use of a 
facilitated discussion model for antenatal 
care to improve communication. Internat J 
Nurs Stud. 2016;54:84–94. doi:10.1016/j.
 ijnurstu.2015.03.018.
 180. Ruiz-Merazo E, Lopez-Yarto M, McDonald SD. 
Group prenatal care versus individual prenatal 
care: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J 
Obstet Gynaecol Can. 2012;34(3):223–9.
 181. Patil CL, Abrams ET, Klima C, Kaponda CP, 
Leshabari SC, Vonderheid SC et al.  
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 134
 CenteringPregnancy-Africa: a pilot of group  
antenatal care to address Millennium 
Development Goals. Midwifery. 2013;29(10): 
1190–8. doi:10.1016/j.midw.2013.05.008.
 182. Jafari F, Eftekhar H, Fotouhi A, Mohammad K, 
Hantoushzadeh S. Comparison of maternal and 
neonatal outcomes of group versus individual 
prenatal care: a new experience in Iran. Health 
Care for Women Int. 2010;31(7):571–84.
 183. WHO recommendations on community 
mobilization through facilitated participatory 
learning and action cycles with women’s groups 
for maternal and newborn health. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2014 (http://www.who.
 int/maternal_child_adolescent/documents/
 community-mobilization-maternal-newborn/
 en/, accessed 29 September 2016).
 184. Azad K, Barnett S, Banerjee B, Shaha S, Khan 
K, Rego AR et al. Effect of scaling up women’s 
groups on birth outcomes in three rural districts 
in Bangladesh: a cluster-randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet. 2010;375(9721):1193–202. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60142-0.
 185. Colbourn T, Nambiar B, Bondo A, Makwenda 
C, Tsetekani E, Makonda-Ridley A et al. 
Effects of quality improvement in health 
facilities and community mobilization through 
women’s groups on maternal, neonatal and 
perinatal mortality in three districts of Malawi: 
MaiKhanda, a cluster randomized controlled 
effectiveness trial. Int Health. 2013;5(3):180–95. 
doi:10.1093/inthealth/iht011.
 186. Fottrell E, Azad K, Kuddus A, Younes L, Shaha S, 
Nahar T et al. The effect of increased coverage 
of participatory women’s groups on neonatal 
mortality in Bangladesh: a cluster randomized 
trial. JAMA Pediatr. 2013;167(9):816–25. 
doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2013.2534.
 187. Lewycka S, Mwansambo C, Rosato M, Kazembe 
P, Phiri T, Mganga A et al. Effect of women’s 
groups and volunteer peer counselling on rates 
of mortality, morbidity, and health behaviours 
in mothers and children in rural Malawi 
(MaiMwana): a factorial, cluster-randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2013;381(9879):1721–35. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61959-X.
 188. Manandhar DS, Osrin D, Shrestha BP, Mesko N, 
Morrison J, Tumbahangphe KM et al. Effect of a 
participatory intervention with women’s groups 
on birth outcomes in Nepal: cluster-randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2004;364:970–9.
 189. More NS, Bapat U, Das S, Alcock G, Patil S, Porel 
M et al. Community mobilization in Mumbai 
slums to improve perinatal care and outcomes: 
a cluster randomized controlled trial. PLoS 
Med. 2012;9(7):e1001257. doi:10.1371/journal.
 pmed.1001257.
 190. Tripathy P, Nair N, Barnett S, Mahapatra R, 
Borghi J, Rath S et al. Effect of a participatory 
intervention with women’s groups on birth 
outcomes and maternal depression in Jharkhand 
and Orissa, India: a cluster-randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2010;375(9721):1182–92. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)62042-0.
 191. Prost A, Colbourn T, Seward N, Azad K, 
Coomarasamy A, Copas A et al. Women’s 
groups practising participatory learning and 
action to improve maternal and newborn health 
in low-resource settings: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Lancet. 2013;381(9879):1736–46. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60685-6. [Erratum 
in: Lancet. 2014;383(9931):1806.]
 192. Baqui AH, El-Arifeen S, Darmstadt GL, Ahmed 
S, Williams EK, Seraji HR et al.; Projahnmo Study 
Group. Effect of community-based newborn
care intervention package implemented through 
two service-delivery strategies in Sylhet district, 
Bangladesh: a cluster-randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet. 2008;371(9628):1936–44. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60835-1.
 193. Bhutta ZA, Soofi S, Cousens S, Mohammad 
S, Memon ZA, Ali I et al. Improvement of 
perinatal and newborn care in rural Pakistan 
through community-based strategies: a 
cluster-randomised effectiveness trial. Lancet. 
2011;377(9763):403–12. doi:10.1016/S0140
6736(10)62274-X.
 194. Kumar V, Mohanty S, Kumar A, Misra RP, 
Santosham M, Awasthi S et al.; Saksham 
Study Group. Effect of community-based 
behavior change management on neonatal 
mortality in Shivgarh, Uttar Pradesh, India: a 
cluster-randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 
2008;372(9644):1151–62. doi:10.1016/S0140
6736(08)61483-X.
 195. Midhet F, Becker S. Impact of community-based 
intervention on maternal and neonatal health 
indicators: results from a community randomized 
trial in rural Balochistan, Pakistan. Reprod 
Health. 2010;7:30. doi:10.1186/1742-4755-7-30.
 196. WHO recommendations on postnatal care of 
the mother and newborn. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2014 (http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/97603/1/9789241506649_
 eng.pdf, accessed 28 September 2016).
 197. WHO guidelines on preventing early 
pregnancy and poor reproductive outcomes 
among adolescents in developing countries. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2011 (http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/44691/1/9789241502214_
 eng.pdf, accessed 28 September 2016).
 198. WHO recommendations on health 
promotion interventions for maternal and 
newborn health. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2015 (http://apps.who.int//iris/
 bitstream/10665/172427/1/9789241508742_
 report_eng.pdf, accessed 28 September 2016).
 199. Mangham-Jefferies L, Pitt C, Cousens S, Mills A, 
Schellenberg J. Cost-effectiveness of strategies 
to improve the utilization and provision of 
maternal and newborn health care in low
income and lower-middle-income countries: a 
systematic review. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 
2014;14:243. doi:10.1186/1471-2393-14-243.
 200. Memon ZA, Khan GN, Soofi SB, Baig IY, Bhutta 
ZA. Impact of a community-based perinatal and 
newborn preventive care package on perinatal 
and neonatal mortality in a remote mountainous 
district in Northern Pakistan. BMC Pregnancy 
Childbirth. 2015;15:106. doi:10.1186/s12884-015
0538-8.
 201. WHO recommendations: optimizing health 
worker roles to improve access to key 
maternal and newborn health interventions 
through task shifting. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2012 (http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/77764/1/9789241504843_
 eng.pdf, accessed 28 September 2016).
 202. Increasing access to health workers in remote 
and rural areas through improved retention: 
global policy recommendations. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2010 (http://www.who.
 int/hrh/retention/guidelines/en/, accessed 
28 September 2016).
 203. Dowswell T, Carroli G, Duley L, Gates S, 
Gülmezoglu AM, Khan-Neelofur D, Piaggio 
G. Alternative versus standard packages of 
antenatal care for low-risk pregnancy. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2015;(7):CD000934.
 204. Villar J, Ba’aqeel H, Piaggio G, Lumbiganon P, 
Miguel Belizan J, Farnot U et al. WHO antenatal 
care randomised trial for the evaluation of a 
new model of routine antenatal care. Lancet. 
2001;357(9268):1551–64.
 205. Vogel JP, Habib NA, Souza JP, Gulmezoglu AM, 
Dowswell T, Carroli G et al. Antenatal care 
packages with reduced visits and perinatal 
mortality: a secondary analysis of the WHO 
Antenatal Care Trial. Reprod Health. 2013;10:19. 
doi:10.1186/1742-4755-10-19.
 135
 References
206. Pattinson R. 2016. Audit of Mpumalanga 
stillbirths. Presentation at ANC guideline 
development group meeting (21–23 March). 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2016.
 207. Gurol I, Scheel I. Adoption and implementation 
of ANC guidelines at large scale. Presentation at 
ANC guideline development group meeting (21
23 March). Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2016.
 208. Conrad P, Schmid G, Tientrebeogo J, Moses A, 
Kirenga S, Neuhann F et al. Compliance with 
focused antenatal care services: do health 
workers in rural Burkina Faso, Uganda and 
Tanzania perform all ANC procedures? Trop 
Med Int Health. 2012;17:300–7. doi:10.1111/
 j.1365-3156.2011.02923.x.
 209. Nyarko P, Birungi H, Armar-Klamesu M, 
Arhinful D, Degarnus S, Odoi-Agyarko H, 
Brew G. Acceptability and feasibility of 
introducing the WHO focused antenatal 
care package in Ghana. FRONTIERS final 
report. Washington (DC): Population Council; 
2006 (http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
 download?rep=rep1&type=pdf&doi=10.1.1.175. 
8828, accessed 28 September 2016).
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 136
 210. Birungi H, Onyango-Ouma W. Acceptability and 
sustainability of the WHO focused antenatal 
care package in Kenya. Frontiers in Reproductive 
Health Program, Population Council; 2006 
(http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
 download?doi=10.1.1.175.8488&rep=rep1&type= 
pdf, accessed 28 September 2016).
 211. Von Both C, Fleßa S, Makuwani A, Mpembeni R, 
Albrecht J. How much time do health services 
spend on antenatal care? Implications for the 
introduction of the focused antenatal care 
model in Tanzania. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 
2006;6:22.
 212. Filby A, McConville F, Portela A. What prevents 
quality midwifery care? A systematic mapping of 
barriers in low and middle income countries from 
the provider perspective. PLoS One. 2016;11(5): 
e153391. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0153391.
 213. AGREE II-Global Rating Scale (GRS) Instrument. 
AGREE Enterprise; 2016 (http://www.agreetrust.
 org/resource-centre/agree-ii-grs-instrument/, 
accessed 28 October 2016).
 214. GREAT Network [website]. GREAT Network; 
2016 (http://greatnetworkglobal.org/, accessed 
27 October 2016).
Annex 1: External experts and WHO staff involved in 
the preparation of this guideline
 WHO Steering Group (Geneva, Switzerland)
 A. Metin Gülmezoglu
 Coordinator
 Department of Reproductive Health and Research
 Maternal and Perinatal Health & Preventing Unsafe 
Abortion Team 
Matthews Mathai
 Coordinator
 Department of Maternal, Newborn, Child and 
Adolescent Health 
Epidemiology, Monitoring and Evaluation Team
 Olufemi T. Oladapo
 Medical Officer
 Department of Reproductive Health and Research
 Maternal and Perinatal Health & Preventing Unsafe 
Abortion Team
 Juan Pablo Peña-Rosas
 Coordinator
 Department Nutrition for Health and Development
 Evidence and Programme Guidance Team
 Özge Tunçalp
 Scientist
 Department of Reproductive Health and Research
 Maternal and Perinatal Health & Preventing Unsafe 
Abortion Team 
Guideline Development Group (GDG)
 Jim Neilson (CHAIR)
 Dundee, United Kingdom
 Mohammed Ariful Alam
 Programme Coordinator
 BRAC Health Nutrition & Population Program
 BRAC Center
 Dhaka, Bangladesh
 Françoise Cluzeau
 Associate Director
 NICE International
 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
 London, United Kingdom
 Luz Maria De-Regil
 Director, Research and Evaluation & Chief Technical 
Advisor
 Micronutrient Initiative
 Ottawa, Canada
 Atf Ghérissi
 Assistant Professor
 Ecole Supérieure des Sciences et Techniques de la 
Santé de Tunis (ESSTST)
 El Manar, Tunisia
 Gill Gyte
 Patient Representative
 Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Group 
Liverpool Women’s NHS Foundation Trust
 Liverpool, United Kingdom
 Rintaro Mori
 Director
 Department of Health Policy
 National Research Institute for Child Health and 
Development
 Tokyo, Japan
 Lynnette Neufeld
 Director
 Monitoring, Learning and Research
 Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition (GAIN)
 Geneva, Switzerland
 Lisa M. Noguchi
 Senior Maternal Health Advisor
 Maternal and Child Survival Program
 Washington, DC, USA
 Nafissa Osman
 Head
 Academic Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
 Faculty of Medicine
 Eduardo Mondlane University
 Maputo, Mozambique
 Erika Ota
 Researcher
 National Center for Child Health and Development 
Tokyo, Japan
 137
 Annex 1: External experts and WHO staff
Tomas Pantoja
 Observers
 Family Physician
 Department of Family Medicine
 Faculty of Medicine
 Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
 Santiago, Chile
 Robert Pattinson
 Professor
 University of Pretoria
 Medical Research Council 
Unit for Maternal and Infant Health Care Strategies
 Arcadia, South Africa
 Kathleen Rasmussen
 Professor
 Division of Nutritional Sciences
 Cornell University
 Ithaca, NY, USA
 Niveen Abu Rmeileh
 Director
 Institute of Community and Public Health 
Birzeit University
 West Bank and Gaza Strip
 Harshpal Singh Sachdev
 Professor
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 138
 Sitaram Bhartia Institute of Science and Research
 New Delhi, India
 Rusidah Selamat
 Deputy Director (Operations)
 Nutrition Division
 Ministry of Health Malaysia
 Putrajaya, Malaysia
 Charlotte Warren
 Senior Associate 
Population Council
 Washington, DC, USA
 Charles Wisonge
 Professor of Clinical Epidemiology & Deputy Director
 Centre for Evidence-based Health Care
 Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences
 Stellenbosch University
 Cape Town, South Africa
 Debbie Armbruster
 Senior Maternal Health Advisor
 Maternal and Child Health Division 
Bureau for Global Health
 United States Agency for International Development 
(USAID)
 Washington, DC, USA
 Diogo Ayres-De-Campos
 Associate Professor
 Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
 Faculty of Medicine
 University of Porto
 Porto, Portugal
 Rita Borg-Xuereb
 International Confederation of Midwives 
Head of Department of Midwifery
 Faculty of Health Sciences
 University of Malta
 Msida, Malta
 Luc de Bernis
 Senior Maternal Health Adviser
 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
 Geneva, Switzerland
 France Donnay
 Senior Program Officer
 Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
 Seattle, WA, USA
 Karen Fogg
 Maternal and Child Health Division
 Bureau for Global Health
 USAID
 Washington, DC, USA
 Roland Kupka
 Senior Adviser, Micronutrients
 Nutrition Section
 United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
 New York, NY, USA
 Chittaranjan Narahari Purandare
 President
 International Federation of Gynecology and 
Obstetrics (FIGO)
 Mumbai, India
Technical Working Group
 Ewelina Rogozinska
 Edgardo Abalos
 Vice Director 
Centro Rosarino de Estudios Perinatales (CREP)
 Rosario, Argentina 
Monica Chamillard
 Obstetrician and Gynecologist
 CREP
 Rosario, Argentina
 Virginia Diaz
 Obstetrician and Gynecologist 
CREP
 Rosario, Argentina
 Soo Downe
 Professor in Midwifery Studies 
University of Central Lancashire
 Preston, Lancashire, United Kingdom
 Kenneth Finlayson
 Senior Research Assistant 
Midwifery Studies 
University of Central Lancashire 
Preston, Lancashire, United Kingdom
 Claire Glenton
 Senior Researcher 
Global Health Unit, Norwegian Public Health Institute
 Oslo, Norway 
Ipek Gurol-Urganci
 Lecturer in Health Services Research
 London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine
 London, United Kingdom
 Khalid S. Khan
 Professor of Women’s Health and Clinical 
Epidemiology 
The Blizard Institute 
London, United Kingdom
 Theresa Lawrie
 Consultant
 Evidence-based Medicine Consultancy
 Bath, United Kingdom
 Simon Lewin
 Senior Researcher 
Global Health Unit, Norwegian Public Health Institute
 Oslo, Norway 
Project Coordinator 
Women’s Health Research Unit 
Queen Mary University of London
 Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry
 London, United Kingdom
 Inger Scheel  
Senior Researcher
 Global Health Unit, Norwegian Public Health Institute
 Oslo, Norway
 WHO regional offices
 Regional Office for Africa
 Leopold Ouedraogo
 Regional Advisor
 Research and Programme Development in 
Reproductive Health
 Health Promotion Cluster
 Regional Office for the Americas/Pan American 
Health Organization (PAHO)
 Susan Serruya
 Director
 Latin American Center for Perinatology, Women and 
Reproductive Health (CLAP/WR)
 Regional Office for Europe
 Gunta Lazdane
 Programme Manager
 Sexual and Reproductive Health Division
 Noncommunicable Diseases and Promoting Health 
through the Life-course
 Regional Office for the Western Pacific
 Mari Nagai
 Technical Officer
 Reproductive and Maternal Health
 Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child and 
Adolescent Health Unit
 Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean
 Karima Gholbzouri
 Medical Officer
 Women’s Reproductive Health
 Regional Office for South-East Asia
 Neena Raina
 Coordinator
 Maternal, Child and Adolescent Health
 139
 Annex 1: External experts and WHO staff
WHO headquarters (Geneva, Switzerland)
 External reviewers
 Emma Allanson
 Consultant
 Department of Reproductive Health and Research
 Maternal and Perinatal Health &  
Preventing Unsafe Abortion Team
 Maurice Bucagu
 Medical Officer, Maternal Health Services 
Department of Maternal, Newborn, Child and 
Adolescent Health
 Policy, Planning and Programme Unit
 Sarah de Masi
 Technical Officer
 Department of Reproductive Health and Research
 Maternal and Perinatal Health &  
Preventing Unsafe Abortion Team
 Pura Rayco-Solon
 Epidemiologist
 Department Nutrition for Health and Development
 Evidence and Programme Guidance Team
 Lisa Rogers
 Technical Officer
 Department Nutrition for Health and Development
 Evidence and Programme Guidance Team
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 140
 Joshua Vogel
 Technical Officer
 Department of Reproductive Health and Research
 Maternal and Perinatal Health &  
Preventing Unsafe Abortion Team
 Zita Weise
 Technical Officer
 Department Nutrition for Health and Development
 Evidence and Programme Guidance Team
 Yacouba Yaro
 Director General
 Center for Studies, Research and Training for 
Economic and Social Development (CERFODES)
 Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso
 Tamar Kabakian
 Associate Professor
 Health Promotion and Community Health 
Department
 Faculty of Health Sciences
 American University of Beirut 
Beirut, Lebanon 
Petr Velebil
 Obstetrician
 Perinatal Centre of the Institute for the Care of 
Mother and Child 
Prague, Czech Republic
 Rodolfo Gomez
 Reproductive Health Advisor
 Latin American Center for Perinatology, Women and 
Reproductive Health (CLAP/WR)
 Montevideo, Uruguay
Annex 2: Other WHO guidelines with recommendations relevant to routine ANC
 Approach
 WHO department responsible
 Year of 
publication
 WHO guideline title
 Recommendation relevant to ANC was adapted for, and 
integrated into, the ANC guideline.
 2010 Various WHO departments and regional 
representatives.
 New recommendation in the ANC guideline supersedes 
the recommendation in this 2011 guideline.
 Increasing access to health workers in remote and 
rural areas through improved retention: global policy 
recommendations
 1.  
2.  Guideline: vitamin A supplementation in pregnant women 2011 Department of Nutrition for Health and 
Development (NHD)
 Department of Reproductive Health and 
Research (RHR)
 Department of Maternal, Newborn, Child and 
Adolescent Health (MCA)
 Referenced
 2011 RHR, MCA Cross-checked for consistency
 3.  WHO recommendations for prevention and treatment of 
pre-eclampsia and eclampsia
 2011 MCA, RHR, Department of Child and Adolescent 
Health (CAH), Making Pregnancy Safer
 4.  Preventing early pregnancy and poor reproductive 
outcomes
 Recommendation relevant to ANC was integrated into the 
ANC guideline.
 2012 RHR Recommendation relevant to ANC was adapted for, and 
integrated into, the ANC guideline.
 2012 NHD, RHR, MCA New recommendation in the ANC guideline supersedes 
the recommendation in this 2012 guideline.
 2012 NHD, RHR, MCA New recommendation in the ANC guideline supersedes 
the recommendation in this 2012 guideline.
 2013 Chronic Diseases Prevention and Management, 
RHR
 2013 RHR Cross-checked for consistency
 5.  WHO recommendations: optimizing health worker roles 
to improve access to key maternal and newborn health 
interventions through task shifting (OptimizeMNH)
 6.  Guideline: vitamin D supplementation in pregnant women 2012 NHD, RHR, MCA New recommendation in the ANC guideline supersedes 
the recommendation in this 2012 guideline.
 Guideline: intermittent iron and folic acid supplementation 
in non-anaemic pregnant women
 7.  
8.  Guideline: daily iron and folic acid supplementation in 
pregnant women
 9.  Diagnostic criteria and classification of hyperglycaemia 
f
 irst detected in pregnancy
 10.  Responding to intimate partner violence and sexual 
violence against women
 11.  Guideline: calcium supplementation in pregnant women 2013 NHD New recommendation in the ANC guideline supersedes 
the recommendation in this 2013 guideline.
 141
 Annex 2: Other WHO guidelines
142
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 WHO guideline title
 12.  Systematic screening for active tuberculosis: principles and 
recommendations
 Year of 
publication
 WHO department responsible
 2013 Strategic and Technical Advisory Group for 
Tuberculosis
 13.  WHO recommendations for the prevention and 
management of tobacco use and second-hand smoke 
exposure in pregnancy
 14.  Guidelines for the identification of substance use and 
substance use disorders in pregnancy
 15.  WHO recommendations on community mobilization 
through facilitated participatory learning and action cycles 
with women’s groups for maternal and newborn health 
16.  Guidelines for the treatment of malaria 2015
 2013 Department of Prevention of Noncommunicable 
Diseases
 2014 Department of Mental Health and Substance 
Abuse 
2014 MCA Referenced
 Approach
 Recommendation relevant to ANC was integrated into the 
ANC guideline.
 Recommendations relevant to ANC were integrated into 
the ANC guideline.
 Recommendation relevant to ANC was integrated into the 
ANC guideline.
 Global Malaria Programme Recommendation relevant to ANC was integrated into the 
ANC guideline.
 17.  Guideline on when to start antiretroviral therapy and on 
pre-exposure prophylaxis for HIV
 2015 Department of HIV Recommendation relevant to ANC was integrated into the 
ANC guideline.
 18.  Consolidated guidelines on HIV testing services 2015 Department of HIV Recommendation relevant to ANC was integrated into the 
ANC guideline.
 19.  WHO recommendations for prevention and treatment of 
maternal peripartum infections
 20. WHO recommendations on health promotion interventions 
for maternal and newborn health
 21.  Guideline: preventive chemotherapy to control soil
transmitted helminths in high-risk groups
 2015 RHR Referenced
 2015 MCA Referenced and cross-checked for consistency
 2016 WHO Evidence and Programme Guidance 
Unit, NHD, Preventive Chemotherapy and 
Transmission Control, Department of Control of 
Neglected Tropical Diseases
 Referenced and cross-checked for consistency
Annex 3: Summary of declarations of interest from 
the Guideline Development Group (GDG) 
members and how they were managed
 Name
 Expertise
 Disclosure of interest Conflict of interest and 
management
 Dr Ariful Alam
 Nutrition, health systems
 None declared
 Not applicable
 Dr Françoise Cluzeau
 Evidence synthesis and guideline 
development using the Grading of 
Recommendations Assessment, 
Development and Evaluation 
(GRADE) approach 
None declared
 Not applicable
 Dr Luz Maria De-Regil
 Nutrition, epidemiology, 
systematic reviews, programme 
implementation
 Full staff employee of the 
Micronutrient Initiative 
and part of the working 
group that advised on the 
International Federation of 
Gynecology and Obstetrics 
(FIGO) recommendations on 
nutrition.
 The conflict was not 
considered serious enough 
to affect GDG membership 
or participation in the 
Technical Consultation.
 Dr Atf Ghérissi
 Systematic reviews, qualitative 
evidence, maternal and perinatal 
health, community health
 None declared
 Not applicable
 Mrs Gill Gyte
 Patient representative, pregnancy 
and childbirth
 Voluntary work for the 
Cochrane Pregnancy and 
Childbirth Group, which is 
funded by United Kingdom 
Department of Health. 
The conflict was not 
considered serious enough 
to affect GDG membership 
or participation in the 
Technical Consultation.
 Dr Rintaro Mori
 Perinatology, neonatology, 
systematic reviews, evidence 
synthesis and guideline 
development using GRADE
 None declared
 Not applicable
 Prof. Jim Neilson 
General obstetrics, perinatology, 
gynaecology, systematic reviews, 
evidence synthesis and guideline 
development using GRADE
 None declared
 Not applicable
 Dr Lynnette Neufeld
 Micronutrients, programmes, 
epidemiology
 Previous employer received 
funding from the Canadian 
Government to design and 
implement iron/folic acid 
and other programmes 
related to nutrition during 
pregnancy; designed 
demonstration projects with 
local partners and academic 
institutions to integrate 
nutrition actions into 
antenatal care (ANC).
 The conflict was not 
considered serious enough 
to affect GDG membership 
or participation in the 
Technical Consultation. 
Prof. Nafissa Osman 
Obstetrics and gynaecology, 
implementation research
 None declared
 Not applicable
 Prof. Bob Pattinson 
Obstetrics and gynaecology, 
delivery of care, evidence synthesis
 None declared
 Not applicable
 143
 Annex 3: Summary of declarations of interest
Dr Erika Ota
 Nutrition, evidence synthesis, 
guideline development
 None declared
 Not applicable
 Dr Kathleen Rasmussen Maternal and child nutrition
 None declared
 Not applicable
 Dr Niveen Abu Rmeileh Community and public health, 
statistical epidemiology
 None declared
 Not applicable
 Prof. H.P.S. Sachdev
 Paediatrics, nutrition, systematic 
reviews
 None declared
 Not applicable
 Ms Rusidah Selamat
 Maternal and infant nutrition, 
community-based programmes, 
implementation research
 None declared
 Not applicable
 Dr Lisa Noguchi
 Midwifery, delivery of care, 
implementation science
 Technical advisor to Bill & 
Melinda Gates Foundation
funded study on group 
ANC for increasing facility 
delivery; travel costs 
supplied by the Maternal 
and Child Survival Program.
 The conflict was not 
considered serious enough 
to affect GDG membership 
or participation in the 
Technical Consultation.
 Dr Tomas Pantoja
 Obstetrics and gynaecology, health 
systems
 None declared
 Not applicable
 Dr Charlotte Warren
 Maternal and perinatal health, 
systematic reviews, implementation 
research
 None declared
 Not applicable
 Prof. Charles Wisonge
 Health systems, systematic reviews, 
delivery of care
 None declared
 Not applicable
 WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 144
145 Annex 4: Implementation considerations
 Annex 4: Implementation considerations for ANC guideline recommendations
 Implementation considerations for ANC guideline recommendations
 Need to know Need to do Need to have Consider
 A. Nutritional interventions
 A.1.1. Nutritional counselling on a 
healthy diet and physical activity 
• Healthy diet and exercise in 
local context 
• Prevalence of overweight
 • Counselling • Counselling skills
 • Time and space for counselling 
• Gender issues and cultural 
expectations of women
 • Local food security
 A.1.2. Nutritional education 
on increasing daily energy and 
protein intake 
• If your setting has an 
undernourished population
 • How to do counselling
 • Counselling • Time to counsel
 • Counselling skills
 • Capacity-building for ANC providers on 
nutrition counselling
 • Task shifting
 • Group-based counselling
 A.1.3. Balanced energy and 
protein supplementation in 
undernourished populations 
• What balanced energy and 
protein supplementation 
means
 • What is available locally that 
provides this
 • Counselling • Time to counsel
 • Counselling skills
 • Capacity-building for ANC providers on 
nutrition counselling
 • Task shifting
 • Group-based counselling
 A.1.4 High protein 
supplementation in 
undernourished populations
 • If this is in use • If in use, advise against high 
protein supplementation 
during pregnancy
 • N/A • N/A
 A.2. Iron and folic acid 
supplements 
• That iron and folic acid is still 
recommended
 • Counselling
 • Dispensing
 • Time to counsel
 • Counselling skills 
• Commodities management
 • Timing of iron vs calcium dosing
 • Community-based dispensing
 • Task shifting
 • Group-based counselling
 A.3. Calcium supplements • If dietary calcium is low in the 
local population
 • Counselling
 • Dispensing
 • Time to counsel
 • Counselling skills 
• Commodities management
 • Timing of iron vs calcium dosing
 • Community-based dispensing
 • Task shifting
 • Group-based counselling
 A.4. Vitamin A supplements • If night blindness is endemic • Counselling
 • Dispensing
 • Time to counsel
 • Counselling skills 
• Commodities management
 • Referencing existing guideline
 • Community-based dispensing
 • Task shifting
 • Group-based counselling
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 146
 Implementation considerations for ANC guideline recommendations
 Need to know Need to do Need to have Consider
 A.10.a Restricting caffeine intake • Whether local women typically 
have caffeine in their diet 
• Counselling • Counselling skills
 • Time and space for counselling
 • Gender issues and cultural norms for 
and expectations of women
 • Task shifting
 B. Maternal and fetal assessment
 B.1. Maternal assessment 
B.1.1. Diagnosing anaemia • What method is in place to 
diagnose anaemia
 • What method is feasible to 
start with
 • How to interpret and manage
 • Collect specimens
 • Follow kit instructions
 • Maintain infection control 
standards
 • Capacity to conduct
 • Kits
 • Quality assurance/quality control  
(QA/QC) for any lab testing
 • Commodities for treatment
 • Switching to full blood count or 
haemoglobinometer method, if feasible
 B.1.2. Diagnosing asymptomatic 
bacteriuria (ASB)
 • What method is in to diagnose 
ASB
 • What method is feasible to 
start
 • How to interpret and manage
 • Collect specimens
 • Follow kit instructions
 • Maintain infection control 
standards
 • Capacity to conduct
 • Kits
 • QA/QC for any lab testing
 • Commodities for treatment
 • What levels of care are feasible for 
each type of test, with urine culture and 
sensitivity (C&S) being gold standard 
but dipstick sufficient in facilities 
without capacity
 B.1.3. Enquiry about intimate 
partner violence (IPV)
 • Local resources available to 
address IPV if identified during 
ANC
 • How to enquire if WHO 
minimum requirements are in 
placeb
 • Country-level guidelines and 
policies
 • Ask about IPV
 • Counselling
 • Well trained providers on first-line 
response
 • Resources and referral mechanisms in 
place
 • Time to counsel
 • Sufficient confidential counselling 
space
 • Counselling skills
 • Forming linkages to supportive and 
social services if not already in place
 B.1.4. Diagnosing gestational 
diabetes mellitus (GDM)
 • National guidance/standard 
of care
 • Guidelines for management of 
abnormal results
 • Information on local context
 • Counselling and testing • Mechanisms and systems for testing 
and receiving results
 • Time and space to counsel
 • Counselling skills
 • Commodity management for oral 
glucose solution and testing supplies
 • QA/QC
 • Clinical algorithm
 • Reference existing guideline
 • Feasibility and acceptability of 
screening strategies
 a. Recommendations A.5–A.9 are not included because interventions that are not recommended are excluded from the implementation considerations table.
 b. Minimum requirements are: a protocol/standard operating procedure; training on how to ask about IPV, and on how to provide the minimum response or beyond; a private setting; confidentiality ensured; system 
for referral in place; and time to allow for appropriate disclosure. 
147 Annex 4: Implementation considerations
 Implementation considerations for ANC guideline recommendations
 Need to know Need to do Need to have Consider
 B.1.5. Screening for tobacco use • How to screen/enquire • Counselling • Counselling skills
 • Time to counsel 
• Gender issues and cultural norms for 
and expectations of women
 • Task shifting
 B.1.6. Screening for alcohol and 
substance abuse
 • Information on local context
 • Local norms and behaviours 
around these risks
 • Refer to the specific WHO 
guidelinec
 • Counselling and testing • Time and space to counsel
 • Counselling skills
 • Referencing existing guideline
 • Cultural context and local norms, 
impact of gender 
• Impact of routine questioning in 
specific settings 
• Task shifting
 • Group-based counselling
 B.1.7. HIV testing • Retest women in high 
prevalence settings or in key 
high-risk groups
 • Counselling and testing • Commodities for testing
 • Time to counsel
 • Counselling skills
 • Linkage to treatment
 • Task shifting
 B.1.8. Tuberculosis (TB) 
screening
 • Population prevalence of TB • Refer to the specific WHO guidanced • Consider having TB clinics track 
pregnancy as a column in the register, 
to allow for better estimation of the 
local burden of TB in pregnancy.
 B.2. Fetal assessment
 B.2.1. Routine daily fetal 
movement (FM) counting
 • If routine daily FM counting is 
being advised
 • If ANC providers are advising 
daily FM counting in routine 
ANC counselling, instruct 
them to omit it, due to lack of 
evidence. 
• N/A • N/A
 B.2.2. Symphysis-fundal height 
(SFH) measurement
 • What methods are being used 
for fetal growth and gestational 
age (GA) assessment 
• Continue to include GA 
assessment and fetal growth 
assessment (by SFH or clinical 
palpation) in ANC contacts 
and documentation
 • N/A • No proven benefit to switching to 
fundal height measurement in settings 
where not currently in place.
 c. WHO guidelines for the identification and management of substance use and substance use disorders in pregnancy. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014 (http://apps.who.int/iris/
 bitstream/10665/107130/1/9789241548731_eng.pdf, accessed 28 September 2016).
 d. Systematic screening for active tuberculosis: principles and recommendations Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013 (http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/84971/1/9789241548601_eng.pdf, accessed 
28 September 2016).
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 148
 Implementation considerations for ANC guideline recommendations
 Need to know Need to do Need to have Consider
 B.2.3. Routine antenatal 
cardiotocography (CTG) 
• If routine antenatal CTG is 
being conducted
 • If being conducted, instruct 
providers to omit this from 
practice, due to lack of 
evidence. 
• N/A • N/A
 B.2.4. Routine ultrasound scans • Health system level
 –Number and capacity of 
ultrasound providers to act 
as providers and trainers/
 mentors
 –Number of functional 
machines available and 
geographic distribution
 –Regulations around 
ultrasound use
 –Cadres – who can perform? 
 –Available pre-service 
education and other 
certification
 • Provider level
 –Training to do anatomy scan 
or on referral
 –How to interpret results and 
do counselling
 • Health system level
 –Determine appropriate 
settings and timeline for 
introduction of ultrasound
 –Obtain machines 
 –Capacity-building plan
 • Provider level
 –Conduct or refer 
 –Document results
 –Provide guidance on how to 
estimate GA and delivery 
date (EDD), depending on 
certainty of last menstrual 
period (LMP) and estimated 
GA at time of ultrasound, 
e.g. WHO’s Manual of 
diagnostic ultrasounde and 
the American Institute of 
Ultrasound in Medicine 
(AIUM) guidelinesf
 • Health system level
 –Transportation for women if services 
are not sufficiently decentralized
 –Cadres with skills to provide quality 
services
 • Facility level
 –Machines
 –Mechanism to review results and get 
reports 
 –Service contracts for machines
 –Surge protection
 –Power supply
 –Counselling skills
 –Security and environmental 
protection for costly machine
 –Space for machine
 –Ultrasound gel supply
 –Staff and supplies to keep equipment 
clean
 • Cost – of purchase, maintenance, 
training, impact of shifting resources to 
ultrasound from other key costs
 • Local availability/feasibility of 
service contracts to support machine 
maintenance, especially in areas not 
previously prioritized for ultrasound 
market development 
• Power supply – availability and stability
 • Protection from power surges, which 
can permanently damage machines
 • Extreme fragility of ultrasound 
transducers (one drop on a concrete 
floor may necessitate purchase of a 
new transducer, costing thousands of 
dollars)
 • Relative benefits compared to other 
interventions 
• Burden to mother
 • Burden to providers and facility
 • Creative, alternative models of service 
delivery that do not burden women 
with travel and related costs
 • Feasibility studies in settings without 
widely available ultrasonography
 • Studies on quality of ultrasound 
B.2.5. Routine Doppler 
ultrasound 
• If routine Doppler ultrasound is 
being conducted
 • If being conducted, instruct 
providers to omit or consider in 
the context of research
 • N/A • Research context
 e. Manual of diagnostic ultrasound, second edition. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013 (http://www.who.int/medical_devices/publications/manual_ultrasound_pack1-2/en/, accessed 21 October 2016).
 f. AIUM practice parameter for the performance of obstetric ultrasound examinations. Laurel (MD): American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (AIUM); 2013 (http://www.aium.org/resources/guidelines/
 obstetric.pdf, accessed 21 October 2016).
149 Annex 4: Implementation considerations
 Implementation considerations for ANC guideline recommendations
 Need to know Need to do Need to have Consider
 C. Preventive measures
 C.1. Antibiotics for ASB • What ASB is and how to 
diagnose it
 • Prescribing
 • Counselling
 • Commodity management
 • Counselling skills
 • Time and space for counselling
 • Capacity-building for providers in 
contexts where this is an unfamiliar 
concept and practice – value of 
treatment, risk of non-treatment, 
antibiotic stewardship/avoidance of 
resistance
 C.2. Antibiotic prophylaxis to 
prevent recurrent urinary tract 
infections
 • Whether currently being 
performed
 • Instruct to omit, if necessary • Research context
 C.3. Antenatal anti-D 
immunoglobulin administration
 • What is practised in the 
context
 • Context-specific • Availability of blood-typing • Research context 
• Recognize that this practice is routine 
in many high-resource settings; 
however, more evidence may be 
needed
 C.4. Preventive anthelminthic 
treatment
 • Local endemicity of helminth 
infections
 • Local status of worm 
infestation-reduction 
programmes
 • Provide or omit, depending on 
context
 • Commodities management • Task shifting
 • Community-based distribution 
C.5. Tetanus toxoid vaccination • That this practice is still 
recommended
 • Local prevalence of neonatal 
tetanus
 • Provide vaccine according to 
established guidance
 • Commodities management • Consider quality improvement (QI) 
activities if gaps in coverage
 • NOTE: Refer to dosing schedule in 
WHO 2006 guideline on maternal 
immunization against tetanusg
 C.6. Intermittent preventive 
treatment in pregnancy 
• See detailed implementation guidance in the specific WHO guideline on malariah • Emerging evidence on task shifting to 
community-based distribution
 • Ways of ensuring that women receive 
the first dose at 13 weeks of gestation
 g. Maternal immunization against tetanus: integrated management of pregnancy and childbirth (IMPAC). Standards for maternal and neonatal care 1.1. Geneva: Department of Making Pregnancy Safer, World Health 
Organization; 2006 (http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/maternal_perinatal_health/immunization_tetanus.pdf, accessed 28 September 2016).
 h. Guidelines for the treatment of malaria, third edition. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015 (http://www.who.int/malaria/publications/atoz/9789241549127/en/, accessed 10 October 2016).
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 150
 Implementation considerations for ANC guideline recommendations
 Need to know Need to do Need to have Consider
 C.7. Pre-exposure prophylaxis 
(PrEP) for HIV prevention 
• Health system level: status 
of national PrEP guidelines 
and whether they include 
pregnant women, who to 
consider at substantial risk of 
HIV infection, sociocultural 
barriers to antiretroviral 
(ARV) use by HIV-uninfected 
pregnant women, availability of 
providers to counsel and train, 
availability of ARVs, cost to 
patients, capacity of laboratory 
to conduct recommended 
baseline and follow-up renal 
function tests
 • Provider level: how to initiate 
and follow up, how to 
recognize renal toxicity, when 
to discontinue PrEP
 • Health system: capacity
building plan
 • Provider level: prescribe and/
 or dispense; counselling 
about the risks, benefits and 
alternatives to continuing to 
use PrEP during pregnancy and 
breastfeeding
 • Commodities management
 • Time and space for counselling, 
confidential dispensing
 • Best mechanisms for the setting (ANC 
vs other)
 • Stigma associated with ARV use
 • Potential social harms to pregnant 
women, including IPV 
• Pending evidence from the National 
Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development (NICHD) study on safety 
and feasibility of PrEP in pregnancy
 • Additional research recommended by 
WHO and others
 • Cost and frequency of stock-outs – 
distribution of drug for treatment vs 
PrEP
 D. Interventions for common physiological symptoms
 D.1–6 • Cultural norms around 
treatment, harmful vs non
harmful practices
 • Counselling • Time to counsel
 • Counselling skills
 • Building ANC providers’ capacity for 
counselling and listening, woman
centered care, etc.
 E. Health system interventions to improve utilization and quality of antenatal care
 E.1. Woman-held case notes • What is currently being used • Ensure case notes are available 
in the appropriate language 
and at the appropriate 
education level for setting
 • Adapt the case notes 
according to context
 • Ensure durable product
 • Commodities management
 • Resources for production
 • Method for retaining a facility copy
 • What format is appropriate
 • Whether it is necessary to exclude 
certain personal information to avoid 
stigmatization
151 Annex 4: Implementation considerations
 Implementation considerations for ANC guideline recommendations
 Need to know Need to do Need to have Consider
 E.2. Midwife-led continuity of 
care (MLCC)
 • What model of care is 
currently being used 
• Whether there are sufficient 
numbers of trained midwives 
• Whether resources are 
available or can be shifted to 
facilitate this model
 • Consult all relevant 
stakeholders, including human 
resource departments and 
professional bodies
 • Assess the need for additional 
training in MLCC
 • Ensure that that there is a well
functioning referral system in 
place
 • Monitor midwife workload and 
burnout
 • A well functioning midwifery 
programme
 • Strategies to scale up the quality and 
number of practising midwives
 • Ways of providing continuity of care 
through other care providers, e.g. lay 
health workers
 • Whether a caseload or team MLCC 
model is more appropriate
 E.3. Group ANC • Cultural norms and women’s 
preferences regarding group 
ANC
 • Consider evaluating in 
research context
 • Appropriate facilities to deal with group 
sessions, including access to large, well 
ventilated rooms, or sheltered spaces 
and adequate seating, and a private 
area for individual examination
 • Providers trained in group facilitation 
and communication
 • Research context
 E.4. Community-based 
interventions to improve 
communication and support
 • Community demographics and 
cultural norms
 • Who are the key stakeholders 
in the community
 • Train facilitators in group 
facilitation, convening public 
meetings, and communication 
techniques
 • Ensure sufficient facilitators 
and resources to support them
 • Train community volunteers/
 lay health workers to identify 
pregnant women in the 
community and enourage their 
attendance
 • Ensure that the individual 
woman’s preferences are 
respected, e.g. with regard to 
partner involvment
 • Group spaces to hold meetings 
• Culturally and educationally 
appropriate educational material, e.g. 
videos, flip charts, pictorial booklets 
and/or cards
 • Ongoing supervision and monitoring of 
facilitators
 • Resources, e.g. additional staff, 
transport and budget for material, for 
community mobilization initiatives
 • Appropriate format and language of 
communication 
• Whether meetings should include men 
and women together or separately
 • Offering women a range of 
opportunities for communication 
and support, so that their individual 
preferences and circumstances can be 
catered for
 • Implementing health system 
strengthening interventions, such 
as staff training, and improving 
equipment, transport, supplies, etc.
WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience
 152
 Implementation considerations for ANC guideline recommendations
 Need to know Need to do Need to have Consider
 E.5. Task shifting components of 
ANC delivery
 • Task shifting allows flexibility 
in certain contexts, but policy
makers need to work towards 
MLCC for all women
 • Give health workers involved in 
task shifting a clear mandate
 • Ensure that lay health workers 
are integrated into the health 
system and given appropriate 
supervision
 • Ongoing supervision and monitoring
 • Commodities management
 • Refer to specific WHO guideline on 
task shiftingi
 E.6. Recruitment and retention of 
staff in rural and remote areas
 • Refer to specific WHO guideline on recruitment and retentionj • Many pregnant women prefer receiving 
care from women health workers
 • Personal safety can impact a woman 
health worker’s decision to apply for, 
and remain in, rural positions
 • Rotation of health workers from urban 
to rural areas and vice versa 
• Agreeing the terms and period of rural 
deployment upfront
 E.7. ANC contact schedules • Timing and content and of 
ANC contacts
 • How to adapt to local settings, 
e.g. which context-specific 
recommendations apply?, 
what can be task shifted? 
• Secure national support for 
increased number of ANC 
contacts
 • Conduct community 
sensitizing activities
 • Involve pre-service training 
institutions and professional 
bodies 
• Assess context-specific 
implications for resources, 
including staff, infrastructure, 
equipment, etc.
 • Long-term planning and resource 
generation 
• Provider training and supervision for 
newly introduced interventions
 • Updated “job aids” (e.g. ANC case 
notes) that reflect changes
 • Updated ANC training curricula and 
clinical manuals
 • Ongoing supervision and monitoring
 • Reorganizing services to reduce waiting 
times
 • Other considerations can be found 
in Chapter 4 of the ANC guideline 
(Implementation of the ANC guideline 
and recommendations)
 i. WHO recommendations: optimizing health worker roles to improve access to key maternal and newborn health interventions through task shifting. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012 (www.optimizemnh.
 org, accessed 10 October 2016).
 j. Increasing access to health workers in remote and rural areas through improved retention: global policy recommendations. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010 (http://www.who.int/hrh/retention/
 guidelines/en/, accessed 10 October 2016).